<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>

<TEI>

  <teiHeader>

    <sourceDesc>

      <titleStmt>

        <title>Pride and Prejudice</title>

        <author>Austen, Jane</author>

      </titleStmt>

    </sourceDesc>

  </teiHeader>
<body><div><head>Chapter 1.</head>
<p>It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.</p>
<p>However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering aneighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful property of some one or</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet made no answer.</p>
<p>“Do you not want to know who has taken it?”cried his wife impatiently.</p>
<p>“You want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing</p>
<p>This was invitation enough.</p>
<p>“Why, my dear, you must know,</p>
<p>he came down on Monday ina chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately;</p>
<p>house by the end of next week.”</p>
<p>“How so? How can it affect them?”</p>
<p>replied his wife,“how can you be so tiresome! You must know that I am thinking of his</p>
<p>“Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that hemay fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes.”</p>
<p>themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you are as handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the party.”</p>
<p>share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has five grown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinkingof her own beauty.”</p>
<p>“In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.”</p>
<p>“But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into</p>
<p>“But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it wouldbe for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit no newcomers.Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for us to visit him if you do not.”</p>
<p>“You are over scrupulous surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you;and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; though I must throw in agood word for my little Lizzy.”</p>
<p>“I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than theothers; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half so good-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving her</p>
<p>“Mr. Bennet, how can you abuse your own children insuch a way? You take delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves.”</p>
<p>friends. I have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.”</p>
<p>“Ah, you do not know what I suffer.”</p>
<p>“But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four thousand a</p>
<p>“It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not</p>
<p>“Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit them all.”</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that theexperience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character. Her mind was lessdifficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented, she fanciedherself nervous. The business of her life was to get her daughters married; its solace was visiting and news.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 2.</head>
<p>Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. He had always intended to visit him, thoughto the last always assuring his wife that</p>
<p>and till the evening after the visit was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosedin the following manner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with:</p>
<p>“I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.”</p>
<p>“We are not in a way to know what Mr. Bingley</p>
<p>“since we are not to visit.”</p>
<p>“that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Mrs. Long has promised to</p>
<p>“I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two niecesof her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinion of her.”</p>
<p>“I do not cough for my own amusement,”</p>
<p>“To-morrow fortnight.”</p>
<p>“and Mrs. Long does not come back till the day before; so it will beimpossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.”</p>
<p>“Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with himmyself; how can you be so teasing?”</p>
<p>One cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But if we do not venture somebody else will; and after all,Mrs. Long and her daughters must stand their chance; and, therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I will</p>
<p>nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you there. What say you, Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and</p>
<p>Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how.</p>
<p>cried his wife.</p>
<p>“I am sorry to hear that; but why did not you tell me thatbefore? If I had known as much this morning, I certainly would not have called on him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit,we cannot escape the acquaintance now.”</p>
<p>The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassingthe rest; though, when the first tumult of joy was over,</p>
<p>it was what she hadexpected all the while.</p>
<p>“How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I shouldpersuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such a goodjoke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said a word about it till now.”</p>
<p>“Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose,”</p>
<p>said Mr. Bennet; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of hiswife.</p>
<p>when the door was shut. “I do not know how you will ever make him amendsfor his kindness; or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not so pleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances everyday; but for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dancewith you at the next ball.”</p>
<p>The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return Mr. Bennet's visit,and determining when they should ask him to dinner.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 3</head>
<p>Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient todraw from her husband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked him in various ways &#8212; with barefaced questions, ingenioussuppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were at last obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of</p>
<p>Her report was highly favourable.</p>
<p>delighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assemblywith a large party.Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling inlove; and very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained.</p>
<p>“and all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing to wish</p>
<p>In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in hislibrary. He had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father.The ladies were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upper window that he wore a blue coat, and rode a</p>
<p>An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and already had Mrs. Bennet planned thecourses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley was obliged to be in town thefollowing day, and, consequently, unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quite disconcerted. She could not imaginewhat business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and</p>
<p>he might be always flying</p>
<p>and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen withhim to the assembly. The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelvehe had brought only six with him from London &#8212; his five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered the assembly room it consisted ofonly five altogether &#8212; Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.</p>
<p>Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasant countenance, and easy,unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women, with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely looked the gentleman; buthis friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien; and the report which was ingeneral circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure ofa man, the ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till hismanners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud; to be above his company, and above being</p>
<p>unworthy to be compared with his friend.</p>
<p>Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room; he waslively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at Netherfield. Such amiablequalities must speak for themselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst and once with MissBingley, declined being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one ofhis own party.His character was decided.He was the proudest,most disagreeable man in the world,</p>
<p>he would never come</p>
<p>Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour was</p>
<p>Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; andduring part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been standing near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr. Bingley, who came from thedance for a few minutes, to press his friend to join it.</p>
<p>“I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I am particularly acquaintedwith my partner. At such an assembly as this it would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whomit would not be a punishment to me to stand up with.”</p>
<p>“I would not be so fastidious as you are,”</p>
<p>“for a kingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls in my life</p>
<p>“You are dancing with the only handsome girl in the</p>
<p>sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and I dare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.”</p>
<p>and turning round he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own</p>
<p>in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy hersmiles, for you are wasting your mite with me.”</p>
<p>Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabeth remained with no verycordial feelings toward him. She told the story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which</p>
<p>The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs. Bennet had seen hereldest daughter much admired by the Netherfield party. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters. Janewas as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane's pleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned toMiss Bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had been fortunate enough never to be without partners,which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned therefore in good spirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived,and of which they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. With a book he was regardless of time; and on the presentoccasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations.</p>
<p>his wife's views on thestranger would be disappointed;</p>
<p>“we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wishyou had been there. Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how well she looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quitebeautiful, and danced with her twice! Only think of that my dear; he actually danced with her twice! and she was the onlycreature in the room that he asked a second time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him stand up with her! But, however, hedid not admire her at all; indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going down the dance. So, he inquired whoshe was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King, and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, andthe two fifth with Jane again, and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the Boulanger&#8212;”</p>
<p>“he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more of his partners.</p>
<p>“Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessivelyhandsome! and his sisters are charming women. I never in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.Hurst's gown &#8212;”</p>
<p>Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against any description of finery. She wastherefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness</p>
<p>fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduring him! He walkedhere, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, my dear, to have givenhim one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man,”</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 4</head>
<p>When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to hersister just how very much she admired him.</p>
<p>“He is just what a young man ought to be,”</p>
<p>“sensible, good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!&#8212;so muchease, with such perfect good breeding !”</p>
<p>“which a young man ought likewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby</p>
<p>“I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. I did not expect</p>
<p>between us. Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never. What could be more natural than hisasking you again? He could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry</p>
<p>“Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general. You never seea fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in your life.”</p>
<p>“I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speak what I</p>
<p>“I know you do; and it is that which makes the wonder. With <hi</p>
<p>one meets with it everywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design &#8212; to take the good of everybody's character and make it still</p>
<p>“Certainly not &#8212; at first. But they are very pleasing women when you conversewith them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in</p>
<p>Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour at the assembly had notbeen calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgement toounassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fine ladies; not deficient in goodhumour when they were pleased, nor in the power of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud and conceited. They were ratherhandsome, had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds, were in the habit of spendingmore than they ought, and of associating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respect entitled to think well of themselves, and meanlyof others. They were of a respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that theirbrother's fortune and their own had been acquired by trade.</p>
<p>father, who had intended to purchase an estate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes made choice of hiscounty; but as he was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness ofhis temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase.</p>
<p>His sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but, though he was now onlyestablished as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at his table &#8212; nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had married a man of morefashion than fortune, less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been of age two years, when he wastempted by an accidental recommendation to look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it for half-an-hour &#8212; was pleased with thesituation and the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.</p>
<p>Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a great opposition ofcharacter. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a greatercontrast to his own, and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley had the firmest reliance,and of his judgement the highest opinion. In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no means deficient, but Darcy was clever. Hewas at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were not inviting. In that respect his friend hadgreatly the advantage. Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continually giving offense.</p>
<p>The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic.</p>
<p>had never met with more</p>
<p>had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful.</p>
<p>people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention</p>
<p>he acknowledged to be</p>
<p>allowed it to be so &#8212; but still they admired her and liked her, and</p>
<p>a sweet girl, and onewhom they would not object to know more of.Miss Bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by such</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 5</head>
<p>Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennets were particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had beenformerly in trade in Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his</p>
<p>town; and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world. For,though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. By nature inoffensive,</p>
<p>Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to Mrs.Bennet. They had several children. The eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was Elizabeth's intimate</p>
<p>That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely</p>
<p>“You began the evening well, Charlotte,”said Mrs. Bennet with civil self-command to Miss Lucas.“You were Mr. Bingley's first choice.”</p>
<p>“Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To be</p>
<p>about it &#8212; but I hardly know what &#8212; something about Mr. Robinson.”</p>
<p>“Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did not I mention it</p>
<p>how he liked our Meryton</p>
<p>whether he did not thinkthere were a great many pretty women in the room, and which he thought the prettiest?and his answering immediately to the last question &#8212;</p>
<p>Bennet, beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'”</p>
<p>“Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed &#8212; that does seemas if &#8212; but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.”</p>
<p>“My overhearings were more to the purpose than <hi rend="i(1)"</p>
<p>“Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he? &#8212; Poor</p>
<p>“I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by hisill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him.</p>
<p>half-an-hour without once opening his lips.”</p>
<p>“I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.”</p>
<p>how he liked</p>
<p>and he could not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry</p>
<p>“I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so veryagreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had heardsomehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come to the ball in a hack chaise.”</p>
<p>“but I wish he had danced with Eliza.”</p>
<p>“I would not dance with him, if I were you.”</p>
<p>“I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you never to dance with</p>
<p>is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour, should think highly of</p>
<p>observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her reflections,</p>
<p>that it is very common indeed; that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling ofself-complacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often usedsynonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think</p>
<p>“If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy,”cried a young Lucas, who came with his sisters,“I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink abottle of wine a day.”</p>
<p>“Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought,”</p>
<p>“and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottle</p>
<p>she would,and the argument ended only with the visit.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 6</head>
<p>The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visit was returned in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasingmanners grew on the goodwill of</p>
<p>was</p>
<p>younger sisters not worth speaking to,a wish of beingbetter acquainted with themwas expressed towards the two eldest.By Jane, this attention was received with the greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw</p>
<p>as it was, had a value as arising in all probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. It was generally evident whenever they met,that he did admire her and to her it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preference whichshe had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; butshe considered with pleasure thatit was not likely to bediscovered by the world in general, since Jane united, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of mannerwhich would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent.</p>
<p>disadvantage to be so very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity offixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost</p>
<p>enough; but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement. In nine cases out of ten a woman had bettershow more affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never do more than like her, if she</p>
<p>“But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If <hi rend="i(1)"</p>
<p>“Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do.”</p>
<p>“But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to conceal it, he must</p>
<p>tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that everymoment should be employed in conversing together. Jane should therefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command his attention.When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure for falling in love as much as she chooses.”</p>
<p>“where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married, and if I were</p>
<p>yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of its reasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced fourdances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quite enough</p>
<p>“Not as you represent it. Had she merely dined with him, shemight only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have also been spent together &#8212; and four</p>
<p>better than Commerce; but with respect to any other leading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.”</p>
<p>“I wish Jane success with all my heart; and if she were married to him to-morrow, Ishould think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a twelvemonth. Happiness in marriage isentirely a matter of chance. If the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand, it does notadvance their felicity in the least. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation; and it is betterto know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your life.”</p>
<p>“You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is not sound, andthat you would never act in this way yourself.”</p>
<p>Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspectingthat she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend.Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be</p>
<p>he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at her</p>
<p>than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of herdark eyes. To this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect</p>
<p>he was forced to acknowledge</p>
<p>her manners were not those ofthe fashionable world,he was caught by their easy playfulness. Of this she was perfectly unaware; to her he was onlythe man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough to dance with.</p>
<p>He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversing with her himself,attended to her conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party were assembled.</p>
<p>“by listening to my conversation with Colonel Forster?”</p>
<p>“That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.”</p>
<p>“But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I see what he isabout. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him.”</p>
<p>On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of</p>
<p>which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said:</p>
<p>“Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, whenI was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball at Meryton?”</p>
<p>“With great energy;&#8212; but it is a subject which always makes a lady</p>
<p>“It will be her turn soon to be teased,”</p>
<p>“I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.”</p>
<p>“You are a very strange creature by way of a friend! &#8212; always wanting me toplay and sing before anybody and everybody !&#8212; If my vanity had taken a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I wouldreally rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.”On Miss Lucas's persevering, however, she added,“Very well, if it must be so, it must.”</p>
<p>“There is a fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar with: ‘Keepyour breath to cool your porridge’; and I shall keep mine to swell my song.”</p>
<p>Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a song or two, and before shecould reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister Mary, who having, inconsequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always impatient for display.</p>
<p>likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she had reached. Elizabeth, easy andunaffected, had been listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad topurchase praise and gratitude by Scotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who, with some of the Lucases, and two or three</p>
<p>exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was his neighbour, till Sir</p>
<p>polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance.”</p>
<p>“You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.”</p>
<p>“Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?”</p>
<p>“It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.”</p>
<p>“You have a house in town, I conclude?”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy bowed.</p>
<p>“I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself &#8212; for I am fond ofsuperior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air of London would agree with Lady Lucas.”</p>
<p>He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposed to make any; and Elizabethat that instant moving towards them, he was struck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to her:</p>
<p>“My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing?&#8212; Mr. Darcy, you must allow me topresent this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. &#8212; You cannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before</p>
<p>And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, though extremely surprised, wasnot unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William:</p>
<p>that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner.”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to beallowed the honour of her</p>
<p>but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William at all shake her purpose by his</p>
<p>“He is, indeed; but considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza, we cannot wonderat his complaisance &#8212; for who would object to such a partner?”</p>
<p>Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman,and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:</p>
<p>“You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in thismanner &#8212; in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion. I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise &#8212; thenothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people!&#8212; What would I give to hear your strictures on them!”</p>
<p>“Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was more agreeably engaged.I have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.”</p>
<p>he would tell her what lady</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity:</p>
<p>“I am all astonishment. How long has she been such a favourite? &#8212; and pray,when am I to wish you joy?”</p>
<p>“That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady's imagination isvery rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.”</p>
<p>settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed; and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you.”</p>
<p>He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose to entertain herself in thismanner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed long.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 7</head>
<p>Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters,was entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother's fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill</p>
<p>She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk to their father and succeeded</p>
<p>The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a most convenient distance for theyoung ladies, who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a milliner's shop just over theway. The two youngest of the family, Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions; their minds were more vacant than theirsisters', and when nothing better offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening;and however bare of news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt. At present, indeed, they were wellsupplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, andMeryton was the headquarters.</p>
<p>Their visits to Mrs. Philips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence. Every dayadded something to their knowledge of the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to knowthe officers themselves. Mr. Philips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a storee of felicity unknown before. They could talk ofnothing but officers; and Mr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when</p>
<p>“From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of thesilliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced.”</p>
<p>Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but</p>
<p>with perfect indifference,</p>
<p>course of the day, as he was going the next morning to London.</p>
<p>“that you should be so ready to think your own children silly. If Iwished to think slightingly of anybody's children, it should not be of my own, however.”</p>
<p>“If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.”</p>
<p>“This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. I had hoped thatour sentiments coincided in every particular, but I must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.”</p>
<p>their father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time when Iliked a red coat myself very well &#8212; and, indeed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thought Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's in his</p>
<p>Watson's as they did when they first came; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman</p>
<p>with a note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waited for an answer.Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read,</p>
<p>“Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,</p>
<p>“If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day withLouisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives, for a whole day's t&#519;te-&#224;-t&#519;te between twowomen can never end without a quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of this. My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the</p>
<p>“I wonder my aunt did not tell us of that.”</p>
<p>“That would be a good scheme,”</p>
<p>“if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home.”</p>
<p>“Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton,</p>
<p>wanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?”</p>
<p>“They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.”</p>
<p>“my mother's purpose will be answered.”</p>
<p>her father an acknowledgment thatthe horses were</p>
<p>Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her mother attended her to the door with manycheerful prognostics of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her,but her mother was delighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission; Jane certainly could not come back.</p>
<p>“This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!”</p>
<p>rain were all her own.</p>
<p>Till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance.Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfield brought the following note for Elizabeth:</p>
<p>“I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose,is to be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday.My kind friends will not hear of</p>
<p>hear of his having been to me &#8212; and, excepting a sore throat and headache there is not much the matter with me. &#8212;</p>
<p>said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the note aloud,</p>
<p>it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Mr. Bingley, and under your orders.”</p>
<p>colds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, though the carriage was not tobe had; and as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only alternative. She declared her resolution.</p>
<p>“How can you be so silly,”</p>
<p>“as to think of such a thing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit tobe seen when you get there.”</p>
<p>“I shall be very fit to see Jane &#8212; which is all I want.”</p>
<p>“No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothing when one has a</p>
<p>exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.”</p>
<p>“We will go as far as Meryton with you,”</p>
<p>“If we make haste,”said Lydia, as they walked along,“perhaps we may see something of Captain Carter before he goes.”</p>
<p>In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers' wives,and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles with impatientactivity, and finding herself at last within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of</p>
<p>She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane were assembled, and where herappearance created a great deal of surprise. That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in such dirty weather, and by herself,was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. She was received,however, very politely by them; and in their brother's manners there was something better than politeness; there was good humour and kindness. Mr.Darcy said very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to hercomplexion, and doubt as to the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter was thinking only of his breakfast.</p>
<p>Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, andthough up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and Jane, who had onlybeen withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at herentrance. She was not equal, however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left them together, could attempt little besides expressions ofgratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attended her.</p>
<p>When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabeth began to like themherself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane.</p>
<p>The advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head achedacutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, in fact, nothingto do elsewhere.</p>
<p>When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so. MissBingley offered her the carriage, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern in parting with her,</p>
<p>Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the chaise to an invitation</p>
<p>Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched to Longbourn to acquaint thefamily with her stay and bring back a supply of clothes.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 8</head>
<p>At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half past sixElizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the muchsuperior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a very favourable answer.Jane was by no means</p>
<p>how much they weregrieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold,</p>
<p>how excessively they</p>
<p>and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not immediately</p>
<p>Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency.His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as shebelieved she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sisterscarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards; who when</p>
<p>When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soonas she was out of the room.Her manners were</p>
<p>“She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent walker. I shallnever forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.”</p>
<p>come at all! Why must she be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!”</p>
<p>“Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, I amabsolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office.”</p>
<p>“but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkablywell when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.”</p>
<p>“and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see your</p>
<p>“To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above herankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean by it? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a mostcountry-town indifference to decorum.”</p>
<p>“It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,”</p>
<p>observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper,</p>
<p>“they were brightened by the exercise.”</p>
<p>&#8212; A short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again:</p>
<p>“I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a very sweet girl,and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no chance of</p>
<p>“Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.”</p>
<p>“it would not make them one jot less agreeable.”</p>
<p>in the world,”</p>
<p>To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged</p>
<p>With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room on leaving the dining-parlour,and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when shehad the comfort of seeing her sleep, and when it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs herself. On entering thedrawing-room she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high</p>
<p>she would amuse herself forthe short time she could stay below, with a book.Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.</p>
<p>“and I hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards the table where a few books were</p>
<p>“And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I aman idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more than I ever looked into.”</p>
<p>perfectly with those in the room.</p>
<p>“it has been the work of many generations.”</p>
<p>“And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying books.”</p>
<p>place. Charles, when you build your house, I wish it may be half as delightful as Pemberley.”</p>
<p>“I wish it may.”</p>
<p>“But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take</p>
<p>“With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.”</p>
<p>“Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get Pemberley by</p>
<p>Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her very little attention for herbook; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest sister, to observe</p>
<p>“Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?”</p>
<p>“will she be as tall as I am?”</p>
<p>“I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or rather</p>
<p>“How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me so much. Such</p>
<p>“how young ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all</p>
<p>“All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?”</p>
<p>scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sureI never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed thatshe was very accomplished.”</p>
<p>“has too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwisethan by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I cannot boast ofknowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that are really accomplished.”</p>
<p>“you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman.”</p>
<p>“no one can be really esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what isusually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; andbesides all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, orthe word will be but half-deserved.”</p>
<p>“I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplishedwomen. I rather wonder now at your knowing any.”</p>
<p>“Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?”</p>
<p>“I never saw such a woman. I never saw such</p>
<p>were both protesting thatthey knew many womenwho answered this description,when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what wasgoing forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.</p>
<p>when the door was closed on her,“is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex byundervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.”</p>
<p>replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,“there is a meanness in all the arts which ladies sometimes</p>
<p>Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.</p>
<p>her sister was worse, and</p>
<p>while</p>
<p>an express to town</p>
<p>This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother'sproposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quiteuncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 9</head>
<p>morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters. In spite of this amendment, however,</p>
<p>Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgement of her situation.The note was immediately dispatched, and its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet,accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.</p>
<p>Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been very miserable; but beingsatisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health wouldprobably remove her from Netherfield. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried home; neither did theapothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on Miss Bingley's appearance andinvitation, the mother and three daughters all attended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not foundMiss Bennet worse than she expected.</p>
<p>was her answer.“She is a great deal too ill to be moved. Mr. Jones says we must not</p>
<p>“It must not be thought of. My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her removal.”</p>
<p>said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,“that Miss Bennet shall receive every possible attention while she remains with</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.</p>
<p>“if it was not for such good friends I do not know what would become ofher, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always the way with her, forshe has, without exception, the sweetest temper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to her.You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is equal toNetherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.”</p>
<p>five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.”</p>
<p>“That is exactly what I should have supposed of you,”</p>
<p>cried he, turning towards her.</p>
<p>“I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen through I am</p>
<p>“That is as it happens. It does not necessarily follow that a deep, intricate</p>
<p>“remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you</p>
<p>“I did not know before,”</p>
<p>“that you were a studier of character. It must be an amusing study.”</p>
<p>“can in general supply but a few subjects for such a study. In a country</p>
<p>“But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in</p>
<p>on in the country as in town.”</p>
<p>Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away.Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph.</p>
<p>“I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They</p>
<p>“seemed to think the country was nothing at all.”</p>
<p>“You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety ofpeople to be met with in the country as in the town, which you must acknowledge to be true.”</p>
<p>“Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting withmany people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families.”</p>
<p>Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister wasless delicate, and directed her eyes towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile.</p>
<p>now asked her</p>
<p>at Longbourn since her coming away.</p>
<p>“Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man SirWilliam is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! So genteel and so easy! He has always something to say to everybody .&#8212; <hirend="i(1)">That is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very important, and never open their mouths, quite</p>
<p>“Did Charlotte dine with you?”</p>
<p>“No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. Formy part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work; my daughters are brought up</p>
<p>“She seems a very pleasant young woman.”</p>
<p>“Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herselfhas often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane &#8212; one does not often seeanybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brotherGardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he didnot. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.”</p>
<p>“There has been many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who firstdiscovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!”</p>
<p>“Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is strong already.But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.”</p>
<p>Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother</p>
<p>with an apologyfor troubling him also with</p>
<p>Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civilalso, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and soonafterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering to eachother during the whole visit, and the result of it was, thatthe youngest should tax Mr. Bingley with</p>
<p>Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humouredcountenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort ofnatural self-consequence, which the attention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own easy manners recommended her, had</p>
<p>was very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly</p>
<p>it would be the most shamefulthing in the world if he did not keep it.His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:</p>
<p>“I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when your sister isrecovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill.”</p>
<p>“Oh! yes &#8212; it would be much better to wait till Jane was well, and by that timemost likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again. And when you have given your ball,”</p>
<p>“I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be</p>
<p>her own and her relations' behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on tojoin in their censure of her, in spite of all Miss Bingley's witticisms on fine eyes .</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 10</head>
<p>The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of the morning with theinvalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined their party in the drawing-room. The loo table, however, didnot appear. Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off hisattention by messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and M . Bingley were at piquet, and Mrs. Hurst was observing their game.</p>
<p>Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passedbetween Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evenness of his lines, or on thelength of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in union with</p>
<p>“How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!”</p>
<p>He made no answer.</p>
<p>“You write uncommonly fast.”</p>
<p>“You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.”</p>
<p>“How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! Letters ofbusiness, too! How odious I should think them!”</p>
<p>well.”</p>
<p>“Thank you &#8212; but I always mend my own.”</p>
<p>“How can you contrive to write so even?”</p>
<p>He was silent.</p>
<p>her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss Grantley's.”</p>
<p>“Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At present I have</p>
<p>“Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you always write</p>
<p>“They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me to determine.”</p>
<p>“It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease, cannotwrite ill.”</p>
<p>“That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline,”</p>
<p>“because he does not write with ease. He studies too much forwords of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?”</p>
<p>“My style of writing is very different from yours.”</p>
<p>“Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his words,</p>
<p>“My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them &#8212; by which</p>
<p>“And which of the two do you call my little recent piece of</p>
<p>“The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because youconsider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highlyinteresting. The power of doing anything with quickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without any attention to the</p>
<p>you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself &#8212; and yet what is thereso very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone</p>
<p>“this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in themorning. And yet, upon my honour, I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at this moment. At least, therefore, I did notassume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.”</p>
<p>“I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gonewith such celerity. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you were mounting your horse,a friend were to say,‘Bingley, you had better stay till next week,’you would probably do it, you would probably not go &#8212; and, at another word,</p>
<p>“that Mr. Bingley did not do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him offnow much more than he did himself.”</p>
<p>“by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of mytemper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think the better of me, ifunder such a circumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I could.”</p>
<p>“Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter, Darcy must speak for himself.”</p>
<p>“You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine, but which Ihave never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to stand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet, that the friendwho is supposed to desire his return to the house, and the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering one argument in</p>
<p>friend is no merit with you.”</p>
<p>“To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either.”</p>
<p>“You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship andaffection. A regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason one into it. I amnot particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs beforewe discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend, where one of them is desired bythe other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying with the desire, without waiting to be</p>
<p>“Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rathermore precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties?”</p>
<p>for that will have more weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assure you, that if Darcy were not such a great tallfellow, in comparison with myself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than Darcy, onparticular occasions, and in particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening, when he has nothing to do.”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, andtherefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her brother for talking such</p>
<p>“You dislike an argument, and want to silence this.”</p>
<p>“Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss Bennet willdefer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.”</p>
<p>When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for an indulgence of somemusic. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity to the pianoforte, and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the way which the other as</p>
<p>Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not helpobserving, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew howto suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her, was still morestrange. She could only imagine, however, at last that she drew his notice because there was a something about her more wrong and reprehensible,</p>
<p>afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her:</p>
<p>She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her</p>
<p>“I heard you before, but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. Youwanted me, I know, to say ‘Yes,’ that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind ofschemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to dance a reelat all &#8212; and now despise me if you dare.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was amixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy had never been so bewitched by anywoman as he was by her. He really believed, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he should be in some danger.</p>
<p>Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of</p>
<p>said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the next day,“you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place,</p>
<p>mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence, which your lady possesses.”</p>
<p>gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in different lines. As for yourElizabeth's picture, you must not have it taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?”</p>
<p>“It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their colour and shape,</p>
<p>At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and Elizabeth herself.</p>
<p>“I did not know that you intended to walk,”</p>
<p>answered Mrs. Hurst,“running away without telling us that you were coming out.”</p>
<p>Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path</p>
<p>“This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the avenue.”</p>
<p>But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughinglyanswered:</p>
<p>“No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommonadvantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye.”</p>
<p>day or two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 11</head>
<p>When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended herinto the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeableas they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe anentertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.</p>
<p>But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object; Miss Bingley's eyes wereinstantly turned toward Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressed himself directly to MissBennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also made her a slight bow, and said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness and warmth remained forBingley's salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she should suffer from thechange of room; and she removed at his desire to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further from the door. He then sat down byher, and talked scarcely to anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.</p>
<p>When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the card-table &#8212; but in vain.She had obtained private intelligence that Mr. Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his open petition rejected.</p>
<p>and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr. Hurst had therefore</p>
<p>principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with Miss Bennet.</p>
<p>Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr. Darcy's progress through his book, as in reading her own; andshe was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered herquestion, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the secondvolume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, “How pleasant it is to spend an eveningin this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I have a house of myown, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library.”</p>
<p>No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round theroom in quest for some amusement; when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said:</p>
<p>would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there are not some among us towhom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure.”</p>
<p>is quite a settled thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send round my cards.”</p>
<p>“if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferablytedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of</p>
<p>“Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be near so much</p>
<p>Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked about the room. Herfigure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the desperation of her feelings,</p>
<p>“Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about</p>
<p>Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the realobject of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, andunconsciously closed his book. He was directly invited to join their party, but</p>
<p>he could imagine but two motivesfor their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would interfere.</p>
<p>She was dying to knowwhat could be his</p>
<p>asked Elizabeth whether</p>
<p>was her answer;“but depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointinghim, will be to ask nothing about it.”</p>
<p>Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in anything, and perseveredtherefore in requiring an explanation of his two motives.</p>
<p>said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak.</p>
<p>confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking; if thefirst, I would be completely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much better as I sit by the fire.”</p>
<p>“I never heard anything so abominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?”</p>
<p>as you are, you must know how it is to be done.”</p>
<p>as to laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.”</p>
<p>“That is an uncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would be</p>
<p>“has given me more credit than can be. The wisest and the best of men &#8212; nay,the wisest and best of their actions &#8212; may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke.”</p>
<p>I never ridicule what is wise and good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, I own, and I laugh atthem whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what you are without.”</p>
<p>avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule.”</p>
<p>“Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride &#8212; where there is a realsuperiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.</p>
<p>“and pray what is the result?”</p>
<p>“I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it himselfwithout disguise.”</p>
<p>world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others so soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelings are not puffed aboutwith every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost forever.”</p>
<p>chosen your fault well. I really cannot laugh at it. You are safe from me.”</p>
<p>a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.”</p>
<p>he replied with a smile,“is willfully to misunderstand them.”</p>
<p>&#8212; cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share.“Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr. Hurst?”</p>
<p>Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was opened; and Darcy, after afew moments' recollection, was not sorry for it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 12</head>
<p>In consequence of an agreement between the sisters,Elizabeth wrote</p>
<p>But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the followingTuesday, which would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was notpropitious, at least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home.Mrs.Bennet sent them word that</p>
<p>and in her postscript it was added,</p>
<p>sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well.Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved &#8212; nor did she muchexpect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr.Bingley's carriage immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be mentioned,</p>
<p>The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them tostay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was then sorry that she had</p>
<p>heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and</p>
<p>it would not be safe for</p>
<p>she was not enough</p>
<p>but Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right.</p>
<p>To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence &#8212; Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough.She attracted him more than he liked &#8212; and Miss Bingley was uncivil to her, and more teasing than usual to</p>
<p>He wisely resolved</p>
<p>that no sign of admiration should now escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity;sensible that if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it.Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of Saturday, andthough they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.</p>
<p>Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latterof the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands withthe former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits.</p>
<p>They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother.Mrs. Bennet wondered</p>
<p>very wrong to give so much</p>
<p>was sureJane would have caught cold</p>
<p>But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to seethem; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation,</p>
<p>They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human nature; and had some newextracts to admire, and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had information for them of a different</p>
<p>much had been said in the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their uncle, a private had beenflogged, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 13</head>
<p>said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning,</p>
<p>“Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,</p>
<p>“The person of whom I speak is a gentleman and a stranger.”</p>
<p>&#8212; you never dropt a word of this; you sly thing! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. But &#8212; good Lord! how</p>
<p>“it is a person whom I never saw in the whole course of my life.”</p>
<p>wife and his five daughters at once.</p>
<p>After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:</p>
<p>“About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago I answered it,for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead, may turn you all</p>
<p>cried his wife,</p>
<p>man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own children; and I am sure, if I had</p>
<p>do it before, but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and</p>
<p>settling an estate away from a family of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.</p>
<p>will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself.”</p>
<p>him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such false friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did</p>
<p>“Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head, as you will</p>
<p>"The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father, always gave me much uneasiness, and since Ihave had the misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearinglest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with any one, with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.&#8212;'There, Mrs. Bennet.'&#8212; My mind however is now made up on the subject, for having received ordination at Easter, I have been sofortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bountyand beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with gratefulrespect towards her Ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England. As aclergyman, moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and onthese grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures of good-will are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next inthe entail of Longbourn estate, will be kindly overlooked on your side , and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch. I cannot beotherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise for it, as well as to assure you of</p>
<p>I propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and shall probably trespass onyour hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting tomy occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day. I remain, dear sir, withrespectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,</p>
<p>“At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,”</p>
<p>“He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and I doubtnot will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.”</p>
<p>“There is some sense in what he says about the girls however, and if he</p>
<p>“to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, thewish is certainly to his credit.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kindintention of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever it were required.</p>
<p>And what can he mean by apologising for being next in the entail? &#8212; We cannot suppose he would help it if he could. &#8212; Could he be a</p>
<p>is a mixture of servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.”</p>
<p>wholly new, yet I think it is well expressed.”</p>
<p>To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting. It wasnext to impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society ofa man in any other colour. As for their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him with adegree of composure which astonished her husband and daughters.</p>
<p>Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the wholefamily. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, norinclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very</p>
<p>them all in due time well disposed of in marriage.This gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarreledwith no compliments, answered most readily.</p>
<p>“You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may proveso, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled so oddly.”</p>
<p>must confess. Not that I mean to find fault with you, for such things I know are all chance in this world. There is noknowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed.”</p>
<p>on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared to admirethem. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted &#8212;”</p>
<p>He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not theonly objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation ofeverything would have touched Mrs. Bennet's heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. The dinnertoo in its turn was highly admired; andhe begged to knowto which of his fair cousinsthe excellency of its cooking was owing.But he was set right there byMrs. Bennet, who assured him with some asperity thatthey were very well able to</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 14</head>
<p>scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants were withdrawn, he thought it time to have someconversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by</p>
<p>his patroness. Lady Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable.Mr. Bennet could not have chosen better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subjectelevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect</p>
<p>"he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank &#8212; such affabilityand condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased to approve of both of the discourses whichhe had already had the honour of preaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturdaybefore, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many people he knew, but he hadnever seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objectionto his joining in the society of the neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his relations. She hadeven condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humbleparsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself &#8212; some</p>
<p>“and I dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great</p>
<p>“The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings</p>
<p>“I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?”</p>
<p>“then she is better off than many girls. And what sort of young lady is</p>
<p>Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marks the young lady of distinguished</p>
<p>sickly constitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed</p>
<p>I am informed by the lady who superintended her education,and who still resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to drive by</p>
<p>“Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by thatmeans, as I told Lady Catherine myself one day, has deprived the British court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased with theidea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I</p>
<p>of giving her consequence, would be adorned by her. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it is a sort of attentionwhich I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.”</p>
<p>“and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. MayI ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?”</p>
<p>“They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I sometimes amusemyself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give them as</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd as he had hoped, and helistened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional</p>
<p>By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, andMr. Bennet wasglad to take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,</p>
<p>readily assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it, (for everything announced it to</p>
<p>Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some deliberationhe chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the volume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, sheinterrupted him with:</p>
<p>“Do you know, mamma,</p>
<p>turning away Richard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him.My aunt told me so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more about it,and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town.”</p>
<p>Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr. Collins, much offended, laid</p>
<p>“I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a seriousstamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to them asinstruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin.”</p>
<p>he acted very wisely inleaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.</p>
<p>degree=".3"/>it should not occur again, if he would resume his book;</p>
<p>ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront,seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared for backgammon.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 15</head>
<p>Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been</p>
<p>father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful acquaintance.The subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good deal counteractedby the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chancehad recommended him to Lady Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high rank, and hisveneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector,</p>
<p>Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking areconciliation with the Longbourn family he had a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as handsome andamiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends &#8212; of atonement &#8212; for inheriting their father's estate;and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.</p>
<p>His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face confirmed his views, andestablished all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening</p>
<p>was his settled choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of anhour's t&#519;te-&#224;-t&#519;te with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturally to theavowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found for it at Longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general</p>
<p>to her younger daughters, she could not take upon her to say &#8212; she could not positively answer &#8212; but she did notknow of any prepossession; her eldest daughter, she must just mention &#8212; she felt it incumbent onher to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.”</p>
<p>Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth &#8212; and it was soon done &#8212; donewhile Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married;and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in her good graces.</p>
<p>Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister except Mary agreed to gowith her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them, at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him, and have his library tohimself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed him after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest foliosin the collection, but really talking to Mr. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such doings discomposed</p>
<p>exceedingly. In his library he had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and</p>
<p>to meet with folly and conceitin every other room of the house, he was used to be free from them there;his civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in theirwalk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and</p>
<p>till they entered Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes wereimmediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in ashop window, could recall them.</p>
<p>But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before,of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with another officer on the other side of the way. The officer was the very Mr. Denny concerning whosereturn from London Lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger's air, all wondered who he could be; andKitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, andfortunately had just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot.</p>
<p>introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in their</p>
<p>This was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals to make himcompletely charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and verypleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversation &#8212; a readiness at the same time perfectlycorrect and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice,and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them,and began the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object.</p>
<p>was then, he</p>
<p>on his way to Longbourn on</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes onElizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked ateach other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a fewmoments, touched his hat &#8212; a salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return.</p>
<p>It was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.</p>
<p>In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave androde on with his friend.</p>
<p>Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of Mr. Phillips's house, andthen made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite of Mrs. Phillips' throwing up theparlour window and loudly seconding the invitation.</p>
<p>Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence,were particularly welcome, andshe was</p>
<p>which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in thestreet, who had told her thatthey were not tosend any more draughts to Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away,when her civility was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. She receivedhim with her very best politeness, which</p>
<p>returned with as much more,</p>
<p>his intrusion, without anyprevious acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladieswho introduced him to her notice.Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of onestranger was soon put to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom, however,</p>
<p>her nieces what they already knew,</p>
<p>he was to have a</p>
<p>She had been watching him</p>
<p>as he walked up and down the</p>
<p>and had Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation, butunluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become</p>
<p>fellows.”Some of them were to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and</p>
<p>Mr. Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the evening.This was agreed to, and</p>
<p>they would have a nicecomfortable noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards.The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.</p>
<p>As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen;but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her</p>
<p>her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even pointedly includedhim in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connectionwith them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 16</head>
<p>As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their aunt,and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach</p>
<p>as they entered the drawing-room,</p>
<p>their uncle's invitation, and was then in the house.</p>
<p>When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats,</p>
<p>was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and</p>
<p>a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understoodfrom him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor &#8212; when she had listened to the description of only one of Lady Catherine'sdrawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardlyhave resented a comparison with the housekeeper's room.</p>
<p>In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion, with occasionaldigressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; andhe found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving toretail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and who had nothing to do but to wishfor an instrument, and examine their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It wasover at last, however. The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,</p>
<p>him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.The officers of the &#8212;&#8212;shire were in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set,and the best of them were of the present party; but Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as <hirend="i(1)">they were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.</p>
<p>Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth wasthe happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only onits being a wet night,</p>
<p>likely to sink into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in Mrs. Phillips,and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he had an opportunity of obligingher in turn, by sitting down to whist.</p>
<p>“I know little of the game at present,”</p>
<p>Mrs . Phillips was very glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.</p>
<p>Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other tablebetween Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but beinglikewise extremely fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes tohave attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth,and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told &#8212; the history of his acquaintancewith Mr. Darcy. She dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject</p>
<p>how far Netherfield was from</p>
<p>and, after receiving her answer,</p>
<p>how long Mr. Darcy had been</p>
<p>said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added,</p>
<p>met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, for I have been connected with his family in a</p>
<p>“You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as youprobably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?”</p>
<p>“As much as I ever wish to be,”cried Elizabeth very warmly.“I have spent four days in the same house with him, and I think him very</p>
<p>“as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one.I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for me to be impartial. But I believe youropinion of him would in general astonish &#8212; and perhaps you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you are in your own</p>
<p>“Upon my word I say no more here than I might say in any housein the neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not find him</p>
<p>“that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with <hirend="i(1)">him I believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and</p>
<p>“I wonder,”</p>
<p>“whether he is likely to be in this country much longer.”</p>
<p>“I do not at all know; but I heard nothing of his going awaywhen I was at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the &#8212;&#8212;shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.”</p>
<p>“Oh! no &#8212; it is not for me to be driven away by Mr. Darcy.If he wishes to avoid seeing me, he must go. We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me painto meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding him but what I might proclaim before all the world, a sense of very greatill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men that everbreathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can never be in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul by a thousand</p>
<p>Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the</p>
<p>appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter especially, with gentle but very intelligible gallantry.</p>
<p>“It was the prospect of constant society, and good society,”</p>
<p>“which was my chief inducement to enter the &#8212;&#8212;shire. I knew it to be a</p>
<p>and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them. Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will notbear solitude. I must have employment and society. A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances have nowmade it eligible. The church ought to have been my profession &#8212; I was brought up for the church, and I should at thistime have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now.”</p>
<p>living in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere.”</p>
<p>“but how could that be? How could his will be disregarded? Why</p>
<p>“There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give me no hopefrom law. A man of honour could not have doubted the intention,</p>
<p>&#8212; in short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the living became vacant two yearsago, exactly as I was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of havingreally done anything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion <hi rend="i(1)">of him, and to him, too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sort of men,</p>
<p>“Some time or other he will be &#8212; but it shall not be by</p>
<p>“But what,”</p>
<p>“A thorough, determined dislike of me &#8212; a dislike which I cannot but attributein some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his father's uncommon attachmentto me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood &#8212; the sort ofpreference which was often given me.”</p>
<p>had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to</p>
<p>After a few minutes' reflection, however, she continued,</p>
<p>“I will not trust myself on the subject,”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed,</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">you, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable”</p>
<p>but she contented herself with,“and one, too, who had probably been his own companion from childhood, connected</p>
<p>“We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of ouryouth was passed together; inmates of the same house, sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. Myfather began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips, appears to do so much credit to &#8212; but he gave up everything to be of useto the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a most intimate,</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself to be</p>
<p>and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him a voluntary promise of</p>
<p>“How strange!”</p>
<p>“How abominable! I wonder that the very pride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just</p>
<p>“It is wonderful,”</p>
<p>friend. It has connected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we are none of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me therewere stronger impulses even than pride.”</p>
<p>of what his father was &#8212; have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose theinfluence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also brotherly pride, which, with some</p>
<p>you will hear him generally cried up as</p>
<p>“I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But sheis too much like her brother &#8212; very, very proud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and I have devotedhours and hours to her amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I understand, highlyaccomplished. Since her father's death, her home has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education.”</p>
<p>“I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley, who seemsgood humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do you know Mr.</p>
<p>“He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr. Darcy is.”</p>
<p>“Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does not want abilities.He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very differentman from what he is to the less prosperous. His pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational,honourable, and perhaps agreeable &#8212; allowing something for fortune and figure.”</p>
<p>The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table and Mr.Collins took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs. Phillips .&#8212; The usual inquiries as to his success was made by the latter. Ithad not been very great; he had lost every point; but when Mrs Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,</p>
<p>with much earnest gravity</p>
<p>it was not of the least</p>
<p>she would not make herself</p>
<p>“I know very well, madam,”</p>
<p>“that when persons sit down to a card-table, they must take their chances of thesethings, and happily I am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. There are undoubtedly many who could not say the same,</p>
<p>Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins for a few moments,</p>
<p>in a low voicewhetherher relation was veryintimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh.</p>
<p>“has very lately given him a living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was firstintroduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.”</p>
<p>“You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters;</p>
<p>“No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine's connections. I</p>
<p>“Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is believedthat she and her cousin will unite the two estates.”</p>
<p>all her attentions, vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already self-destined for another.</p>
<p>conceited woman.”</p>
<p>“I have not seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never liked her,and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believe shederives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for her nephew, whochooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth allowed that</p>
<p>and they continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards,</p>
<p>party, but his manners recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elizabeth went awaywith her head full of him. She could think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not timefor her even to mention his name as they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets, ofthe fish she had lost and the fish she had won; and</p>
<p>regard his losses at whist,</p>
<p>he crowded his</p>
<p>had more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 17</head>
<p>Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr. Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment andconcern; she knew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr. Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to questionthe veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having really endured such unkindness, was enough tointerest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to be done, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, andthrow into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.</p>
<p>“been deceived, I dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea.</p>
<p>which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.”</p>
<p>“Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say on behalf of theinterested people who have probably been concerned in the business? Do clear them too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of</p>
<p>“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion. My dearestLizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in such a manner, one, whom hisfather had promised to provide for. It is impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his character, could be capable of</p>
<p>should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be not so, let Mr.Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in his looks.”</p>
<p>“It is difficult indeed &#8212; it is distressing. One does not know what to think.”</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think.”</p>
<p>Jane could think with certainty on only one point &#8212; that</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public.</p>
<p>The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by thearrival of some of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for thelong-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for the following Tuesday.The two ladieswere delighted to see their dear friend again,</p>
<p>what she had beendoing with herself since their separation.</p>
<p>saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took</p>
<p>The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs.Bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from Mr.Bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions oftheir brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr. Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr.</p>
<p>though they each, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them,and a ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even</p>
<p>is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of those who consider</p>
<p>Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did not often speak</p>
<p>whether he intended toaccept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening's amusement;and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, andwas very far from dreading a rebuke either from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing to dance.</p>
<p>can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing myself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my faircousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity of soliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially, apreference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for her.”</p>
<p>her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham'shappiness and her own were perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could. She was notthe better pleased with his gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more.It now first struck her, that</p>
<p>was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being the mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a quadrille table at Rosings,</p>
<p>The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities toward herself,and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of hercharms, it was not long before</p>
<p>marriage was extremely agreeable to her.Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute</p>
<p>make the offer, and till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.</p>
<p>would have been in a very pitiable state at this time, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such a succession ofrain as prevented their walking to Meryton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after &#8212; the very shoe-roses for Netherfieldwere got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of heracquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable to</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 18</head>
<p>Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked in vain</p>
<p>him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual care,and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won</p>
<p>and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his</p>
<p>to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and who</p>
<p>to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned;adding, with a significant smile,</p>
<p>“I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had notwanted to avoid a certain gentleman here.”</p>
<p>This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as itassured her that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham's absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure againstthe former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which hedirectly afterwards approached to make. Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. She was resolved against any sort ofconversation with him, and turned away with a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose</p>
<p>But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyedfor the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, shewas soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice. The first two dances,however, brought a return of distress; they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn, apologising instead of attending, andoften moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. Themoment of her release from him was ecstacy.</p>
<p>She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment</p>
<p>he was universally</p>
<p>When those dances were over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation with her,when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowingwhat she did, she accepted him. He walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried</p>
<p>“I dare say you will find him very agreeable.”</p>
<p>“Heaven forbid! That would be the greatest misfortune ofall!&#8212; To find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such an evil.”</p>
<p>When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim her hand,Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper,</p>
<p>allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man of ten times his consequence.Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she wasarrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, and reading in her neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholding it. They stoodfor some time without speaking a word; and</p>
<p>their silence was to lastthrough the two dances,and at first was resolved not to break it;</p>
<p>it would be the greater</p>
<p>she made some slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was again silent. After a pauseof some minutes, she addressed him a second time with:&#8212;</p>
<p>“It is your turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. <hi</p>
<p>whatever she wished him to say</p>
<p>“Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I may observe thatprivate balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But now we may be silent.”</p>
<p>“Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?”</p>
<p>“Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to be entirely</p>
<p>“Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you</p>
<p>“for I have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds. We are each ofan unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down toposterity with all the eclat of a proverb.”</p>
<p>“This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,”</p>
<p>“How near it may be to mine , I cannot pretend to say .&#8212;</p>
<p>“I must not decide on my own performance.”</p>
<p>He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when</p>
<p>very often walk to Meryton.She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resist the temptation, added,“When you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.”</p>
<p>The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not aword, and Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said,</p>
<p>“Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may ensure his <hi rend="i(1)">making friends &#8212; whether he may be equally capable of retaining them, is less certain.”</p>
<p>replied Elizabeth with emphasis,“and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.”</p>
<p>Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. At that moment, Sir WilliamLucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr. Darcy, he stopped with a bow of</p>
<p>is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to the first circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you, andthat I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Miss Eliza (glancing at her sister andBingley) shall take place. What congratulations will then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:&#8212; but let me not interrupt you, sir . You will notthank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”</p>
<p>The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but Sir William's allusion to hisfriend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancingtogether. Recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said,</p>
<p>“Sir William's interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.”</p>
<p>“I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not have interrupted anytwo people in the room who had less to say for themselves. We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of</p>
<p>“Books &#8212; oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the same</p>
<p>“I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of</p>
<p>“No &#8212; I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full of</p>
<p>“The present always occupies you in such scenes &#8212; does</p>
<p>said he, with a look of doubt.</p>
<p>“Yes, always,”she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject,as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming,</p>
<p>was unappeasable.</p>
<p>said he, with a firm voice.</p>
<p>“And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?”</p>
<p>“It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure</p>
<p>“May I ask to what these questions tend?”</p>
<p>“And what is your success?”</p>
<p>answered he gravely,“that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet,that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on</p>
<p>“But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have another opportunity.”</p>
<p>“I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours,”</p>
<p>he coldly replied. She said no more, and they wentdown the other dance and parted in silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equaldegree, for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerable powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against</p>
<p>They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, and with an expression of civil</p>
<p>“So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham! Your sister has</p>
<p>communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the late Mr. Darcy's steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicitconfidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy's using him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he has always been remarkablykind to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, but I know very well that Mr.</p>
<p>well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way. His cominginto the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you, Miss Eliza, for this discovery</p>
<p>“for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of Mr.Darcy's steward, and of that, I can assure you, he informed me himself.”</p>
<p>replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer.“Excuse my interference &#8212; It was kindly meant.”</p>
<p>I see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Darcy.”</p>
<p>She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject ofBingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfiedwith the occurrences of the evening. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that momentsolicitude for Wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for</p>
<p>“I want to know,”said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sister's,“what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have been too pleasantlyengaged to think of any third person; in which case you may be sure of my pardon.”</p>
<p>does not know the wholeof his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the</p>
<p>and I am sorry to say that by his account as well as his sister's, Mr. Wickham is by</p>
<p>“Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?”</p>
<p>“No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.”</p>
<p>“This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I am satisfied. But what</p>
<p>it was left to him <hi</p>
<p>said Elizabeth warmly;</p>
<p>of his friend was a very able one I dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that</p>
<p>She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be nodifference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr. Bingley's regard, andsaid all in her power to heighten her confidence in it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose</p>
<p>told her with great exultation that</p>
<p>“by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation of mypatroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of the house the names of his cousinMiss de Bourgh, and of her mother Lady Catherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of my meeting with, perhaps,a nephew of Lady Catherine de Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him,which I am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.”</p>
<p>him to be Lady Catherine's  nephew. It will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy would consider hisaddressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt;</p>
<p>it was not in the least</p>
<p>if it were, it must belong</p>
<p>Mr. Collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when</p>
<p>“My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world in your excellentjudgement in all matters within the scope of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a wide difference between theestablished forms of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I consider the clericaloffice as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdom &#8212; provided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same timemaintained. You must therefore allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform what I look on as apoint of duty. Pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the casebefore us I consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself.”</p>
<p>And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerlywatched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could nothear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words “apology,” “Hunsford,” and “Lady Catherine de Bourgh.”It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed himtime to speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contemptseemed abundantly increasing withthe length of his second speech, and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and movedanother way. Mr. Collins then returned to Elizabeth.</p>
<p>“to be dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the</p>
<p>answered me with the utmost civility, and</p>
<p>he was so well convinced ofLady Catherine's discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily.It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him.”</p>
<p>As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almostentirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to, made her perhaps almost ashappy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she feltcapable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts she plainly saw were bent the sameway, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a mostunlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person(Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but of her expectation that Jane would soon be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animatingsubject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match.</p>
<p>were the first points of self-gratulation;</p>
<p>then it was such a comfortto think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover,such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and lastly, it was</p>
<p>It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it isthe etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life.She concluded with many good wishes that</p>
<p>though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.</p>
<p>In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's words, or persuade her todescribe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by Mr.Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.</p>
<p>sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.”</p>
<p>“For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offendMr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!”</p>
<p>Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views inthe same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently glancing her eye at Mr.Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that hisattention was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady</p>
<p>At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning atthe repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken. Elizabeth now began torevive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing</p>
<p>such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she beganher song. Elizabeth's eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with animpatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she mightbe prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary's powers were by no means fitted for such a display;her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedlytalking to Bingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint, and when Mary</p>
<p>“That will do extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other</p>
<p>Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her,and sorry for her father's speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to.</p>
<p>“were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure,in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of aclergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other</p>
<p>beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for hisparish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as possible. And I do not thinkit of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes hispreferment. I cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towardsanybody connected with the family.”</p>
<p>And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to beheard by half the room. Many stared &#8212; many smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, whilehis wife seriously commended Mr. Collins for</p>
<p>in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas,</p>
<p>he was a remarkably clever,</p>
<p>agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more</p>
<p>his feelings were not of asort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed.That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing herrelations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were</p>
<p>The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by Mr. Collins, whocontinued most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with</p>
<p>to stand up with somebody</p>
<p>as to dancing, he was</p>
<p>his chief object was by</p>
<p>point of remaining close to her the whole evening.There was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas,who often joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself.</p>
<p>She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice; though often standingwithin a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be the probable consequence of her</p>
<p>The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Mrs.Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they werewished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidentlyimpatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw a languor over thewhole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches ofMr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his sisters on</p>
<p>entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests.Darcy said nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mr. Bingley andJane were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as eitherMrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of“Lord, how tired I am!”accompanied by a violent yawn.</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly civil in her hopeof seeing the whole family</p>
<p>how happy he would make themby eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation.Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and</p>
<p>opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time.</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that,allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled atNetherfield in the course of three or four months. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and withconsiderable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quitegood enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 19</head>
<p>The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made hisdeclaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and having nofeelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances,which he supposed a regular part of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast,he addressed the mother in these words:</p>
<p>“May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when Isolicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?”</p>
<p>Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. Bennet answered instantly,</p>
<p>“Oh dear! &#8212; yes &#8212; certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be veryhappy &#8212; I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs.”</p>
<p>And gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out:</p>
<p>“Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse me. He canhave nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself.”</p>
<p>“No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are.”&#8212; And upon Elizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape,</p>
<p>Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction &#8212; and a moment's consideration making heralso sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried to conceal, by incessantemployment the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr.</p>
<p>disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. You would have been less amiable in my eyes had there not been this littleunwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected mother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of mydiscourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I enteredthe house, I singled you out as the companion of my future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on this subject, perhaps it would beadvisable for me to state my reasons for marrying &#8212; and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife, as I</p>
<p>The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by his feelings,made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further, and he continued:</p>
<p>clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it will add verygreatly to my happiness; and thirdly &#8212; which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendationof the very noble lady whom I have the honour of calling patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked too!) on thissubject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left Hunsford &#8212; between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging</p>
<p>A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a gentlewoman for my sake; and for your own,let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such awoman as soon as you can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.'Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the noticeand kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything Ican describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her rankwill inevitably excite. Thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views were directed towardsLongbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that being, as I am, toinherit this estate after the death of your honoured father, (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfy myself withoutresolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event takes place&#8212; which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself itwill not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the violence of my affection.To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well aware that it could not be compliedwith; and that one thousand pounds in the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's decease, is all that you may ever be</p>
<p>when we are married.”</p>
<p>It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.</p>
<p>“You forget that I have made no answer. Let me do it without further loss of time</p>
<p>otherwise than to decline them.”</p>
<p>“I am not now to learn,”replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the hand,“that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom theysecretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a third time. I amtherefore by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.”</p>
<p>“Upon my word, sir,”</p>
<p>I am not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked asecond time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make me happy, and I am convinced that I am the last womanin the world who could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she would find me in</p>
<p>“Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so,”</p>
<p>“but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you. And you maybe certain that when I have the honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable</p>
<p>“Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave tojudge for myself, and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing your hand, do all in mypower to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, andmay take possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered, therefore, as finally</p>
<p>And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thus addressed</p>
<p>receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I know it to be theestablished custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as wouldbe consistent with the true delicacy of the female character.”</p>
<p>cried Elizabeth with some warmth,“you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in theform of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way as to convince you of its being one.”</p>
<p>addresses is merely words of course. My reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand is unworthy youracceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the familyof de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration, that in</p>
<p>small that it will in all likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must therefore conclude that you are notserious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by suspense, according to the usual practice of</p>
<p>“I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegancewhich consists in tormenting a respectable man. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank you again and again for</p>
<p>plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegant female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking the truth from her heart.”</p>
<p>cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry;“and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the express authority of both yourexcellent parents, my proposals will not fail of being acceptable.”</p>
<p>To such perseverance in wilful self-deception</p>
<p>would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew;</p>
<p>considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to bedecisive, and whose behavior at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 20</head>
<p>Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his</p>
<p>having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner sawElizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the breakfast-room, andcongratulated both him and herself in warm terms</p>
<p>received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded</p>
<p>the particulars of their interview,with the result of which hetrusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her bashful</p>
<p>This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have been glad to be equally</p>
<p>“that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to her about itmyself directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will make her know it.”</p>
<p>“but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she wouldaltogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she actuallypersists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of temper, she could</p>
<p>she is as good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure.”</p>
<p>She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her husband, called out as she</p>
<p>“Oh! Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.You must come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calmunconcern which was not in the least altered by her communication.</p>
<p>said he, when she had finished her speech.“Of what are you talking?”</p>
<p>“Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.”</p>
<p>“And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.”</p>
<p>“Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the library.</p>
<p>it was.“Very well &#8212; and this offer of marriage you have refused?”</p>
<p>“Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your accepting it. Is</p>
<p>“Yes, or I will never see her again.”</p>
<p>stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see</p>
<p>Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Mrs. Bennet, who hadpersuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.</p>
<p>“What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking in this way? You promised me</p>
<p>“I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me the free use of</p>
<p>Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did Mrs. Bennet give up thepoint. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, withall possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to herattacks. Though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.</p>
<p>Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well ofhimself to comprehend on what motives his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way. His regard for herwas quite imaginary; and the possibility of her deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.</p>
<p>While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them.</p>
<p>She wasmet in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper,</p>
<p>this morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him.”</p>
<p>Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the samenews; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room, where</p>
<p>was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion,</p>
<p>to comply with the wishes of all her family.</p>
<p>“for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used,</p>
<p>Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth.</p>
<p>“looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if wewere at York, provided she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy &#8212; if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer ofmarriage in this way, you will never get a husband at all &#8212; and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your father is dead. <hirend="i(1)">I shall not be able to keep you &#8212; and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told you in the library,you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children.Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination fortalking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! &#8212; But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied.”</p>
<p>Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with heror soothe her would only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them, till they were joined by Mr.Collins, who entered the room with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls,</p>
<p>“Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and</p>
<p>Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground,</p>
<p>to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whoseinquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and</p>
<p>duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhapsnot the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I have often observed thatresignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, considerme as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter's favour, without having paid</p>
<p>having accepted my dismission from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well throughthe whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 21</head>
<p>The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and</p>
<p>As for the gentleman himself, his feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoidher, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensibleof himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and</p>
<p>The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or ill health. Mr. Collins was also</p>
<p>affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he stil meant to stay.</p>
<p>After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned, and tolament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their aunt's where his regretand vexation, and the concern of everybody was well talked over. To Elizabeth, however,he voluntarily acknowledged that</p>
<p>“as the time drew near that I had better not meet Mr. Darcy; that to be in the sameroom, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than</p>
<p>all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with them to Longbourn, and during thewalk he particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to herself, and it was</p>
<p>Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield. Theenvelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister'scountenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon, and putting theletter away, tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew offher attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her upstairs.When they had gained their own room, Jane, taking out the letter, said:</p>
<p>“This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good deal. Thewhole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town &#8212; and without any intention of coming back again. You shallhear what she says.”</p>
<p>She then read the first sentence aloud, which</p>
<p>to follow their brother to town directly,</p>
<p>day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had a house.The next was in these words:</p>
<p>dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile</p>
<p>To these highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; andthough the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament;it was not to be supposedthat their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there;</p>
<p>she was persuaded that</p>
<p>may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that thedelightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in</p>
<p>none of the party willreturn into Hertfordshire this winter.I will read it to you.</p>
<p>“When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him toLondon might be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when Charles gets totown he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hoursin a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are already there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my dearest friend, had anyintention of making one of the crowd &#8212; but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaietieswhich that season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall</p>
<p>“that he comes back no more this winter.”</p>
<p>“Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own master. But you donot know all. I will read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from <hi</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">we are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, andaccomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting, from the hope we dare toentertain of her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will notleave the country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will havefrequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister'spartiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to favouran attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so</p>
<p>nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings</p>
<p>“Most willingly.”</p>
<p>“You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love withyou, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care</p>
<p>“Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen you together can</p>
<p>she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the case is this: We are not rich enough, or grand enough for them; and she is the more anxious toget Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been one intermarriage, she may have less trouble inachieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my</p>
<p>degree less sensible of your merit than when he took leave of you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade himthat, instead of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.”</p>
<p>“If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,”</p>
<p>“your representation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know the foundationis unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceiving herself.”</p>
<p>“That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not takecomfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.”</p>
<p>whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere?”</p>
<p>“and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his twosisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by all means to refuse him.”</p>
<p>“How can you talk so?”</p>
<p>“You must know that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I</p>
<p>“I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consider your situationwith much compassion.”</p>
<p>“But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be required. A thousand</p>
<p>The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt.</p>
<p>Caroline's interested wishes,</p>
<p>those wishes, however</p>
<p>She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt on the subject, and had soonthe pleasure of seeing its happy effect. Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affectionsometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.</p>
<p>They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without being</p>
<p>she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that</p>
<p>go away just as they were all getting so intimate together.After lamenting it, however, at some length,</p>
<p>Mr. Bingley would be soondown again and soon dining at Longbourn,and the conclusion of all was</p>
<p>only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 22</head>
<p>The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during thechief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins. Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. “It keeps him in good humour,”</p>
<p>This was very amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabeth had anyconception of; its object was nothing else than to secure her from any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towards herself. Suchwas Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost secure of success if he</p>
<p>escape out of Longbourn House the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throw himself at her feet. He was anxious toavoid the notice of his cousins, from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he was notwilling to have the attempt known till its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almost secure, and with reason, for Charlotte hadbeen tolerably encouraging, he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday. His reception, however, was of the most flatteringkind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane.But little had she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.</p>
<p>In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow, everything was settled between</p>
<p>to name the day that was to</p>
<p>and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination totrifle with his happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wishfor its continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon thatestablishment were gained.</p>
<p>Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed witha most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom they could give littlefortune; and his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter hadever excited before, how many years longer Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and</p>
<p>whenever Mr. Collins shouldbe in possession of the Longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at St.</p>
<p>The whole family, in short, were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formedhopes of coming out a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from theirapprehension of Charlotte's dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She had gained her point, and had time to consider of</p>
<p>Her reflections were in general satisfactory.</p>
<p>was neither sensible nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he would be her</p>
<p>Without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony, marriage had always been her object; itwas the only honourable provision for well-educated young women of small fortune, and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be theirpleasantest preservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, shefelt all the good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose</p>
<p>Elizabeth would wonder, andprobably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation.</p>
<p>when he returned to Longbourn to dinner,to drop no hint of what had</p>
<p>A promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without</p>
<p>evade, and he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to publish his prosperous love.</p>
<p>As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony ofleave-taking was performed when the ladies moved for the night; andMrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality, saidhow happy they should be tosee him at Longbourn again, whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them.</p>
<p>“this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what I have been hoping</p>
<p>They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish for so speedy a return,</p>
<p>my not taking so material a step without her ladyship's concurrence.”</p>
<p>and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and besatisfied that we shall take no offence.”</p>
<p>“Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionateattention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of your regard during mystay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall now take the liberty ofwishing them health and happiness, not excepting my cousin Elizabeth.”</p>
<p>With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised to find that hemeditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her younger girls, and Marymight have been prevailed on to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there was a solidity in his reflectionswhich often struck her, and</p>
<p>But on the following morning, every hope of this kind was done away. Miss Lucas called soonafter breakfast, and in a private conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.</p>
<p>The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying himself in love with her friend had once occurred toElizabeth within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could encourage himherself, and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out,</p>
<p>The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling her story, gave way to amomentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and</p>
<p>Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion, because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?”</p>
<p>had now recollected herself, and making a strong effort for it,was able to assure her with tolerable firmness that</p>
<p>relationship was highly grateful to her,</p>
<p>she wished her all</p>
<p>“I see what you are feeling,”</p>
<p>“You must be surprised, very much surprised &#8212; so lately as Mr. Collins waswishing to marry you. But when you have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, youknow; I never was. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins's character, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced thatmy chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth quietly answered</p>
<p>&#8212; and after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did notstay much longer, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard. It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea</p>
<p>Collins's making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now accepted.She had always felt that</p>
<p>matrimony was not exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possible that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed everybetter feeling to worldly advantage.Charlotte the wife of Mr.Collins was a most humiliating picture!</p>
<p>disgracing herself and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 23</head>
<p>Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what shehad heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mention it, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, to announce herengagement to the family. With many compliments to them, and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses, he unfoldedthe matter &#8212; to an audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for</p>
<p>with more perseverance than politeness,</p>
<p>and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:</p>
<p>“Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you know that Mr.Collins wants to marry Lizzy?”</p>
<p>Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment;</p>
<p>he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now putherself forward to confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to theexclamations of her mother and sisters by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which she was readily joined by Jane, and by</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal while Sir William remained; but</p>
<p>disbelieving the whole ofthe matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy together; and</p>
<p>Two inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, thatElizabeth was the real cause</p>
<p>and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could consoleand nothing appease her. Nor did that day wear out her resentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth without scolding her, a monthpassed away before she could speak to Sir William or Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before she could at all forgive</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he</p>
<p>Lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!</p>
<p>Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only a clergyman; andit affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.</p>
<p>of having a daughter well married; and she called at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though Mrs. Bennet's sour looksand ill-natured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away.</p>
<p>Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the</p>
<p>ever subsist between them again.Her disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her sister, of whoserectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had nowbeen gone a week and nothing more was heard of his return.</p>
<p>Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting the days till she mightreasonably hope to hear again. The promised letter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with allthe solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted. After discharging his conscience on that head,</p>
<p>with many rapturous expressions,</p>
<p>it was merely with the viewof enjoying her society that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to</p>
<p>marriage, that she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to</p>
<p>Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. Onthe contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband.It was very strange that heshould come to Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in thehouse while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable.Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, and they gave way only to the greater distress of</p>
<p>Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day after day passed away withoutbringing any other tidings of him than the report which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to Netherfield the whole winter; areport which highly incensed Mrs. Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood.</p>
<p>&#8212; not that Bingley was indifferent &#8212; but</p>
<p>his sisters would besuccessful in keeping him away.Unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so dishonorable to</p>
<p>two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of Miss Darcy and the amusements of London might be too</p>
<p>As for Jane, her anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painfulthan Elizabeth's, but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never</p>
<p>an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express her impatience for his</p>
<p>would think herself very ill used.It needed all Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.</p>
<p>Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his reception at Longbourn was notquite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention; and luckily for the others, thebusiness of love-making relieved them from a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimesreturned to Longbourn only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.</p>
<p>was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention of anything concerning the match threw herinto an agony of ill-humour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of Miss Lucas was odious to her. As hersuccessor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating thehour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins,was convinced thatthey were talking of theLongbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead.</p>
<p>of this house, that I should be forced to make way for her, and live to see her take her place in it!”</p>
<p>“My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope for better things. Let</p>
<p>This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead of making any answer, shewent on as before.</p>
<p>“I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it was</p>
<p>“I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. Howanyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's own daughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 24</head>
<p>London for the winter,</p>
<p>concluded with</p>
<p>Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she foundlittle, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupied the chief of it. Her manyattractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of thewishes which had been unfolded in her former letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being an inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, andmentioned with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silentindignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister, and resentment against all the others. To Caroline's assertion of her brother'sbeing partial to Miss Darcy she paid no credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she hadalways been disposed to like him,she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on</p>
<p>that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happiness to thecaprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatevermanner he thought best, but her sister's was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself.It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing.</p>
<p>whether Bingley's regardhad really died away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether he had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escapedhis observation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remainedthe same, her peace equally wounded.</p>
<p>A day or two passed before Jane had</p>
<p>pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall all be as wewere before.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.</p>
<p>acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not <hi rend="i(1)"</p>
<p>“you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do notknow what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.”</p>
<p>Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on hersister's warm affection.</p>
<p>“this is not fair. You wish to think all the world respectable,and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself againstit. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few peoplewhom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms</p>
<p>sense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; the other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it is</p>
<p>“My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin yourhappiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and Charlotte's steady,</p>
<p>“To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could bebenefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understandingthan I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as I do ; and youmust feel, as well as I do; that the woman who marries him cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte</p>
<p>“and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happy together. But enough ofthis. You alluded to something else. You mentioned two  instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy,</p>
<p>ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but ourown vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than it does.”</p>
<p>being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.”</p>
<p>“but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error, andthere may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.”</p>
<p>“Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what I think ofpersons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.”</p>
<p>“Yes, in conjunction with his friend.”</p>
<p>“I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish hishappiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman can secure it.”</p>
<p>“Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness; theymay wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great connections, and</p>
<p>“Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to choose Miss Darcy,”</p>
<p>“but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have known hermuch longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they shouldhave opposed their brother's. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable? If theybelieved him attached to me, they would not try to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you makeeverybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken &#8212; or,at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in the best light,in the light in which it may be understood.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's name was scarcely evermentioned between them.</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more, and though a dayseldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity.</p>
<p>of what she did not believe herself,</p>
<p>been merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more;but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet's best comfort was thatMr. Bingley must be down</p>
<p>girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then. It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction among her companions.When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough in Meryton to disappointall the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.”</p>
<p>“Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not all expect</p>
<p>“but it is a comfort to think that whatever of that kind may befall you, you have anaffectionate mother who will always make the most of it.”</p>
<p>Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverseoccurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of generalunreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openlyacknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they had known anything</p>
<p>Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstancesin the case, unknown to the society of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility ofmistakes &#8212; but by everybody else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 25</head>
<p>After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, Mr.Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival of Saturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his side, by</p>
<p>return into Hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men.</p>
<p>took leave of his relations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before;wished</p>
<p>On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, whocame as usual to spend the Christmas at Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well bynature as education. The Netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade, and within view of his ownwarehouses, could have been so well-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was anamiable, intelligent, elegant woman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between the two eldest and herself especially, theresubsisted a very particular regard. They had frequently been staying with her in town.</p>
<p>The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her arrival was to distribute her presents anddescribe the newest fashions. When this was done she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.</p>
<p>ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of her girls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing in it.</p>
<p>“for Jane would have got Mr. Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh,sister! It is very hard to think that she might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had it not been for her own perverseness. He made heran offer in this very room, and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married before I have, and thatthe Longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed, sister. They are all for what they can get. I amsorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who thinkof themselves before anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of Jane andElizabeth's correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the conversation.</p>
<p>When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject.</p>
<p>“I am sorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, such as youdescribe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that</p>
<p>“An excellent consolation in its way,”</p>
<p>“but it will not do for us. We do not suffer by <hi rend="i(1)">accident. It does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of agirl whom he was violently in love with only a few days before.”</p>
<p>indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is as often applied to feelings which arise only from a half-hour's acquaintance, as to a real,strong attachment. Pray, how violent was Mr. Bingley's love?”</p>
<p>“I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to otherpeople, and wholly engrossed by her. Every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended two or three youngladies, by not asking them to dance; and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not general</p>
<p>“Oh, yes! &#8212; of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. Poor Jane!I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately. It had better have happened to you,Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be</p>
<p>Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister's ready</p>
<p>"that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her. We live inso different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable that</p>
<p>“And that is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody ofhis friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcymay perhaps have heard of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleansehim from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs without him.”</p>
<p>“So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane correspondwith his sister? She  will not be able to help calling.”</p>
<p>“She will drop the acquaintance entirely.”</p>
<p>But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as thestill more interesting one of Bingley's being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subjectwhich convinced her, on examination, that</p>
<p>entirely hopeless. It was possible, and</p>
<p>Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in</p>
<p>the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him.</p>
<p>The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses, the Lucases, and theofficers, there was not a day without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and sister, thatthey did not once sit down to a family dinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers always made part of it &#8212; of whichofficers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth's warm commendation of him,narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference of each other was plain</p>
<p>To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his generalpowers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire to which he</p>
<p>years before, it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of procuring.</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. Hereconsequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minute description which Wickham couldgive, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being madeacquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's treatment of him,</p>
<p>gentleman's reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it,</p>
<p>was confident at last thatshe recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 26</head>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given onthe first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:</p>
<p>“You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warnedagainst it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involve yourself or endeavourto involve him in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against him; he</p>
<p>let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Your father would depend on your</p>
<p>“Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.”</p>
<p>“Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of myself, and of Mr.Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if I can prevent it.”</p>
<p>“Elizabeth, you are not serious now.”</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love with Mr. Wickham;no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw &#8212; and if he becomes really attached to me&#8212; I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh! that abominable Mr. Darcy! Myfather's opinion of me does me the greatest honour; and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. Inshort, my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see every day that where there isaffection, young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into engagements with each other, how can I promise to bewiser than so many of my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it would be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you,therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object. When I am in company with him, I will not bewishing. In short, I will do my best.”</p>
<p>“Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very often. At</p>
<p>said Elizabeth with a conscious smile:“very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from that. But donot imagine that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas asto the necessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now, I</p>
<p>she was,and Elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderfulinstance of advice being given on such a point, without being resented.</p>
<p>but as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage was now fast approaching, and shewas at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she“wished they might be happy.”Thursday was to be the wedding day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas as paid her farewell visit; andwhen she rose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompaniedher out of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:</p>
<p>Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.</p>
<p>“and I hope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be aswelcome to me as either of them.”</p>
<p>The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door, andeverybody had as much to say, or to hear, on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their correspondence was as regularand frequent as it had ever been; that it should be equally unreserved was impossible.Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that</p>
<p>was over,and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what had been,rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how shewould speak of her new home, how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letterswere read,</p>
<p>She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could notpraise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most friendly and obliging. Itwas Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there to know</p>
<p>Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in London; andwhen she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.</p>
<p>Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is.Jane had been a week intown without either seeing or hearing from Caroline.She accounted for it, however,</p>
<p>“is going to-morrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunity of</p>
<p>She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley.</p>
<p>were her words,“but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of mycoming to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached her. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but somuch engaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit wasnot long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall see them soon here.”</p>
<p>discover to Mr. Bingley her sister's being in town.</p>
<p>Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself thatshe did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. After waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and</p>
<p>manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt.</p>
<p>“My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her betterjudgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear sister, thoughthe event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was asnatural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to</p>
<p>in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not callingbefore, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was perfectlyresolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me out as she did; Ican safely say that every advance to intimacy began on her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting wrong, andbecause I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though weknow this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he isto his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fearsnow, because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met long, long ago. He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something shesaid herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. Icannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance ofduplicity in all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will make me happy &#8212; your affection,</p>
<p>but not with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely gladthat you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am sure you will be very</p>
<p>Jane would no longer beduped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions.His character sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane,</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away.</p>
<p>subsided, his attentions were over, he was the admirer of some one else.Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it withoutmaterial pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that she would have beenhis only choice, had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whomhe was now rendering himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with him forhis wish of independence.</p>
<p>could be more natural; and while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was ready to allow it a wise anddesirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him happy.</p>
<p>All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the circumstances, she thus went</p>
<p>“I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had Ireally experienced that pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings arenot only cordial towards him; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that Iam in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness has been effectual; and thoughI certainly should be a more interesting object to all my acquaintances, were I distractedly in love with him, I cannot say that I regret my</p>
<p>They are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on aswell as the plain.”</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 27</head>
<p>With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwisediversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to takeElizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan andshe gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeingCharlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionablesisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her a peep at Jane; and,in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settledaccording to Charlotte's first sketch. She was to accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of spending a night in London was</p>
<p>The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came tothe point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.</p>
<p>The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His</p>
<p>pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in</p>
<p>her &#8212; their opinion of everybody &#8212; would always coincide,there was a solicitude, an</p>
<p>which she felt</p>
<p>with a most sincere regard;</p>
<p>whether married or single,he must always be her model of the amiable and pleasing.</p>
<p>Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. SirWilliam Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, andwere listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William's too long. Hecould tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn out, like his information.</p>
<p>It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early as to be in GracechurchStreet by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when they entered the passage shewas there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were atroop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to wait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness,as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the</p>
<p>Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her sister; and she was moregrieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods ofdejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley'svisit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and herself, which proved that the former had,</p>
<p>so well.</p>
<p>“what sort of girl is Miss King? I should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.”</p>
<p>“Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs, between themercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me, because itwould be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is mercenary.”</p>
<p>“If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know what to</p>
<p>“She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.”</p>
<p>“No &#8212; why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain <hi rend="i(1)">my affections, because I had no money, what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was</p>
<p>“But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so soon after</p>
<p>“A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums whichother people may observe. If she does not object to it, why should we?”</p>
<p>It only shows her being deficient in something herself &#8212; sense or feeling.”</p>
<p>“No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should be sorry,you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.”</p>
<p>“Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire;and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrow where I shallfind a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after</p>
<p>Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the unexpected happiness of aninvitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.</p>
<p>“We have not quite determined how far it shall carry us,”</p>
<p>No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was</p>
<p>“what delight! what felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu todisappointment and spleen. What are young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport we shall spend! And when we <hi rend="i(1)">do return, it shall not be like other travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We willknow where we have gone &#8212; we will recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbledtogether in our imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let <hi</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 28</head>
<p>Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting toElizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and theprospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.</p>
<p>When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in search of the Parsonage,and every turning expected to bring it in view. The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabeth smiled at the recollection</p>
<p>At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the road, the house standing init, the green pales, and the laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door, and thecarriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment theywere all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth wasmore and more satisfied with coming when she found herself so affectionately received. She saw instantly that her cousin's manners were notaltered by his marriage; his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy hisinquiries after all her family. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; andas soon as they were in the parlour,he welcomed thema second time, with ostentatious formality</p>
<p>and punctually repeated all his wife's offers of refreshment.</p>
<p>Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and</p>
<p>proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost</p>
<p>But though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh</p>
<p>looked with wonder at her friend that</p>
<p>an air with such a companion.When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainlywas not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general Charlotte wisely</p>
<p>their journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large and well laid out,and to the cultivation of which he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his most respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired thecommand of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here,leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view waspointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many treesthere were in the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which the country, or the kingdom could boast, none were to becompared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was ahandsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.</p>
<p>From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows; but the ladies, nothaving shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte took her sister and friendover the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband's help. It was rather small, but wellbuilt and convenient; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit.When Mr. Collins could be forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and by Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it,</p>
<p>She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It was spoken of againwhile they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining in, observed:</p>
<p>“Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh onthe ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but youwill be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will include you and mysister Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming. We dine atRosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I should</p>
<p>“Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed,”</p>
<p>“Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of woman whom onecannot regard with too much deference.”</p>
<p>The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and telling again what hadalready been written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte's degree of contentment, tounderstand her address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had also toanticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties oftheir intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.</p>
<p>About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a suddennoise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry,and calling loudly after her. She opened the door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out&#8212;</p>
<p>a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more, and down they ran into thedining-room, which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate.</p>
<p>“I expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but</p>
<p>“it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them; theother is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little creature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?”</p>
<p>“She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind. Why does she</p>
<p>is the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in.”</p>
<p>said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas.“She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She will make him avery proper wife.”</p>
<p>Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; andSir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantlybowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that way.</p>
<p>At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into</p>
<p>Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to</p>
<p>which Charlotte explained byletting them know that thewhole party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 29</head>
<p>Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and hiswife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady Catherine'scondescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.</p>
<p>to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could haveforeseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, includingthe whole party) so immediately after your arrival!”</p>
<p>“I am the less surprised at what has happened,”</p>
<p>“from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which my situationin life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.”</p>
<p>Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. Mr.Collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a dinner,might not wholly overpower them.</p>
<p>When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth&#8212;</p>
<p>far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever of yourclothes is superior to the rest &#8212; there is no occasion for anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply</p>
<p>While they were dressing,</p>
<p>two or three times to their different doors,</p>
<p>as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner.</p>
<p>who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done to his</p>
<p>As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. Everypark has its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expectedthe scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazingaltogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.</p>
<p>When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every moment increasing, and evenSir William did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from</p>
<p>she could witness without</p>
<p>From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fineproportion and the finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, andMrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it with her husbandthat the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have</p>
<p>In spite of having been at St. James's Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeursurrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightenedalmost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and couldobserve the three ladies before her composedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features, which might once have beenhandsome. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was notrendered formidable by silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone, as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr.</p>
<p>exactly what he had represented.</p>
<p>When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some</p>
<p>small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; her features, though not plain,were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and whowas entirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes.</p>
<p>After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view, Mr.</p>
<p>it was much better worth</p>
<p>The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and all the articles ofplate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship's desire, andlooked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish wascommended, first by him and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law said, in a manner which Elizabethwondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especiallywhen any dish on the table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there wasan opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh &#8212; the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and thelatter said not a word to her all dinner-time.</p>
<p>was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss de Bourgh ate,</p>
<p>she was indisposed.</p>
<p>When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but to hear LadyCatherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner, asproved that she was not used to have her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte's domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, and gaveher a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as hers, andinstructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry.</p>
<p>nothing was beneath thisgreat lady's attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others.In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions toMaria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, andwho she observed to Mrs. Collinswas a very genteel, pretty kind</p>
<p>how many sisters she had,whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they had beeneducated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her mother's maiden name?Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions but answered them very composedly. Lady</p>
<p>“I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estates from thefemale line. It was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?”</p>
<p>“Oh! then &#8212; some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our instrument is</p>
<p>and their father has not so good an income as yours. Do you draw?”</p>
<p>taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.”</p>
<p>“My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.”</p>
<p>“No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home without a</p>
<p>“Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess you must have been</p>
<p>“Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as wished to learnnever wanted the means. We were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be idle, certainly</p>
<p>“Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had known yourmother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regularinstruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am alwaysglad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and it was but theother day that I recommended another young person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her. Mrs.</p>
<p>be much in company. But really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and</p>
<p>the first. And to be kept back on such a motive! I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or</p>
<p>“Upon my word,”</p>
<p>“you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. Pray, what is your age?”</p>
<p>“With three younger sisters grown up,”</p>
<p>“your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.”</p>
<p>Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and</p>
<p>the first creature who hadever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.</p>
<p>“You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need not conceal your age.”</p>
<p>“I am not one-and-twenty.”</p>
<p>When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tables were placed. LadyCatherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the two girls had thehonour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relateto the game, except when</p>
<p>A great deal more passed at the other table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking &#8212;stating the mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyshipsaid, thanking her for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many. Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memorywith anecdotes and noble names.</p>
<p>When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose, the tables were brokenup, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins, gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gathered round the fire to hear LadyCatherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach; and withmany speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins's side and as many bows on Sir William's they departed. As soon as they had driven from the</p>
<p>Elizabeth was called on by her cousin</p>
<p>which, for Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her commendation,though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise into his own</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 30</head>
<p>Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was long enoughto convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often metwith. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his morning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; but when hewent away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin bythe alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or in reading andwriting, and looking out of the window in his own book-room, which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that</p>
<p>the dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a more pleasant aspect;but she soon saw that</p>
<p>reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively;</p>
<p>From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr.Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failedcoming to inform them of, though it happened almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes' conversationwith Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed upon to get out.</p>
<p>Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and not many in which hiswife did not think it necessary to go likewise; and till</p>
<p>she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then they were honoured with acall from her ladyship, and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits.</p>
<p>examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently;found fault with the arrangement of the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment,</p>
<p>were too large for her family.</p>
<p>though this great lady wasnot in the commission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carriedto her by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the</p>
<p>The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week; and, allowing for theloss of Sir William, and there being only one card-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first. Their otherengagements were few, as the style of living in the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins's reach. This, however, was no evil toElizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and theweather was so fine for the time of year that she had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she frequently went whilethe others were calling on Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered path,which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.</p>
<p>In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. Easter was approaching,and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heardsoon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks, andthough there were not manyof her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might beamused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady</p>
<p>who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest</p>
<p>His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walking the whole morningwithin view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making his bow as the carriageturned into the Park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There weretwo nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle Lord&#8212;&#8212; and, to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him.</p>
<p>what an honour they might</p>
<p>“I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would never have comeso soon to wait upon me.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach wasannounced by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty,</p>
<p>his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward her friend, met her with every appearance ofcomposure. Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him without saying a word.</p>
<p>Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred</p>
<p>time without speaking to anybody. At length, however,his civility was so far awakened as</p>
<p>She answered him in the usual way, and after a moment's pause, added:</p>
<p>“My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never happened to see</p>
<p>She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see whether he would betray anyconsciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane, and</p>
<p>as he answered that</p>
<p>The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 31</head>
<p>Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage, andthe ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasures of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before theyreceived any invitation thither &#8212; for while there were visitors in the house, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church tocome there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at</p>
<p>The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in LadyCatherine's drawing-room. Her ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she couldget nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person</p>
<p>Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was a welcome relief to him atRosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Kentand Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that roombefore; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself, as well as of Mr. Darcy. <hirend="i(1)">His eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a while sharedthe feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out:</p>
<p>“What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking of? What areyou telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.”</p>
<p>said he, when no longer able to avoid a reply.</p>
<p>share in the conversation if you are speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music thanmyself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed herto apply. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.</p>
<p>“So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write to her, Ishall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often tell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constantpractice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs. Collins has noinstrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs. Jenkinson's room. Shewould be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house.”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and made no answer.</p>
<p>When coffee was over,Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of</p>
<p>and she sat down directly to the instrument. He drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listenedto half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from her, and making with his usual deliberationtowards the pianoforte stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and atthe first convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:</p>
<p>will not be alarmed though your sister does play so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to befrightened at the will of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidate me.”</p>
<p>I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in factare not your own.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam,</p>
<p>“Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe aword I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I had hopedto pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in</p>
<p>will shock your relations to hear.”</p>
<p>“Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,”cried Colonel Fitzwilliam.“I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.”</p>
<p>first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at a ball &#8212; and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced onlyfour dances! I am sorry to pain you &#8212; but so it was. He danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge,more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.”</p>
<p>“I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond my own</p>
<p>“True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, Colonel Fitzwilliam,what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.”</p>
<p>“Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?”said Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam.“Shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world,</p>
<p>“I can answer your question,”said Fitzwilliam,“without applying to him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.”</p>
<p>“I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,”</p>
<p>“of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone</p>
<p>“do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many women'sdo. They have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own fault&#8212; because I will not take the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe my fingers as capable as any otherwoman's of superior execution.”</p>
<p>the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.”</p>
<p>Here they were interrupted byLady Catherine, who called out to knowwhat they were talking</p>
<p>few minutes, said to Darcy:</p>
<p>“Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and could have theadvantage of a London master. She has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have been a delightfulperformer, had her health allowed her to learn.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his cousin's praise; but neitherat that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss de Bourgh</p>
<p>Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing with them manyinstructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the gentlemen, remainedat the instrument till her ladyship's carriage was ready to take them all home.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 32</head>
<p>Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Janewhile Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor.As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her half-finishedletter that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only,</p>
<p>by letting her know that</p>
<p>ladies were to be within.</p>
<p>They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinkinginto total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergence recollecting whenshe had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed:</p>
<p>“How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy! It must havebeen a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and hissisters were well, I hope, when you left London?”</p>
<p>She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a short pause added:</p>
<p>his time there in the future. He has many friends, and he is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing.”</p>
<p>“If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for theneighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did nottake the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the same</p>
<p>“if he were to give it up as soon as any eligible purchase offers.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothingelse to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.</p>
<p>He took the hint, and soon began with,</p>
<p>it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford.”</p>
<p>“I believe she did &#8212; and I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on</p>
<p>“Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife.”</p>
<p>“Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very fewsensible women who would have accepted him, or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding &#8212; though I am notcertain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light</p>
<p>“It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy a distance of her own</p>
<p>“And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day's journey. Yes, I</p>
<p>>advantages of the match,” cried Elizabeth. "I should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled near her family.”</p>
<p>“It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyond the veryneighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.”</p>
<p>As he spoke there was a sort of smilewhich Elizabeth fancied she understood;</p>
<p>and she blushed as she answered:</p>
<p>“I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her family. The far</p>
<p>as will allow of frequent journeys &#8212; and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself near  her family under less</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said,</p>
<p>You cannot have been always at Longbourn.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back hischair, took a newspaper from the table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder voice:</p>
<p>“Are you pleased with Kent?”</p>
<p>and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from her walk. The t&#234;te &#224; t&#234;te surprised them.Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much toanybody, went away.</p>
<p>said Charlotte, as soon as he was gone.“My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have called on us inthis familiar way.”</p>
<p>But when Elizabeth told of his silence; it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wishes,</p>
<p>which was the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table,but gentlemen cannot always be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people wholived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning,sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam camebecause he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her ownsatisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of her former favourite George Wickham; and though,in comparing them, she sawthere was less captivatingsoftness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners,</p>
<p>But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult to understand. It couldnot be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect ofnecessity rather than of choice &#8212; a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knewnot what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was generally different, which her ownknowledge of him could not have told her; and as she would have liked to have believed this change the effect of love, and the object of that loveher friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came toHunsford; but without much success.</p>
<p>friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, stedfast gaze,</p>
<p>whether there were much</p>
<p>She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her, butElizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which</p>
<p>would vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.</p>
<p>Fitzwilliam.He was beyond comparisonthe most pleasant man; he certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 33</head>
<p>More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly</p>
<p>the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought,</p>
<p>it was a favourite haunt of</p>
<p>How it could occur a secondtime, therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third.It seemed like wilfulill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but heactually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her.</p>
<p>he was asking some oddunconnected questions &#8212; about her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins's</p>
<p>perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying there</p>
<p>His words seemed to implyit. Could he have Colonel Fitzwilliam in his thoughts?</p>
<p>must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter.It distressed her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales</p>
<p>She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane's last letter, and dwelling on somepassages which proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw on looking up thatColonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a smile, she said:</p>
<p>“I did not know before that you ever walked this way.”</p>
<p>“as I generally do every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage.</p>
<p>And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonage together.</p>
<p>the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.”</p>
<p>“He likes to have his own way very well,”replied Colonel Fitzwilliam.“But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having it than manyothers, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speak feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial and dependence.”</p>
<p>“In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of either. Nowseriously, what have you ever known of self-denial and dependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose, or</p>
<p>many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greater weight, I may suffer from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry where they like.”</p>
<p>“Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very often do.”</p>
<p>life who can afford to marry without some attention to money.”</p>
<p>“and pray, what is the usual price of an earl's younger son? Unless the elder brotheris very sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.”</p>
<p>He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped.</p>
<p>which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,she soon afterwards said:</p>
<p>“I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of havingsomeone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as well for thepresent, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.”</p>
<p>said Colonel Fitzwilliam,“that is an advantage which he must divide with me. I am joined with him in the</p>
<p>“Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does your charge give</p>
<p>her own way.”</p>
<p>As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner in which</p>
<p>why she supposed Miss Darcy</p>
<p>she had somehow or other</p>
<p>of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley. Ithink I have heard you say that you know them.”</p>
<p>“I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man &#8212; he is a</p>
<p>in those points where he most wants care. From something that he told me in our journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebtedto him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose that Bingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.”</p>
<p>“It is a circumstance which Darcy of course could not wish to be generally known,because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it would be an unpleasant thing.”</p>
<p>told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage, butwithout mentioning names or any other particulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believing him the kind of young man to get into ascrape of that sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.”</p>
<p>“I understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady.”</p>
<p>“And what arts did he use to separate them?”</p>
<p>“He did not talk to me of his own arts,”said Fitzwilliam, smiling.“He only told me what I have now told you.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation. After watching hera little, Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.</p>
<p>“I am thinking of what you have been telling me,”</p>
<p>“Your cousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?”</p>
<p>“I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of his friend'sinclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy. But,”</p>
<p>“as we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to besupposed that there was much affection in the case.”</p>
<p>said Fitzwilliam,</p>
<p>This was spoken jestingly;</p>
<p>that she would not trust herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly changing theconversation talked on indifferent matters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them,she could think without interruption of all that she had heard.It was not to be supposedthat any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected. There could not exist in the world two men overwhom Mr. Darcy could have such boundless influence.</p>
<p>she had always attributed to Miss Bingley</p>
<p>If his own vanity, however,did not mislead him, he was the cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had suffered, and stillcontinued to suffer. He had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one couldsay how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.</p>
<p>“There were some</p>
<p>were Colonel Fitzwilliam'swords; and those strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in business in London.</p>
<p>&#8212; her understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neither could anything be urged against my father, who,though with some peculiarities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will probably never reach.”When she thought of her mother indeed, her confidence gave way a little; butshe would not allow that</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">there had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whose pride,she was convinced,would receive a deeperwound from the want of importance in his friend's connections, than from their want of sense;and she was quite decided, at last, that</p>
<p>governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister.</p>
<p>The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on a headache; and it grew so muchworse towards the evening, that, added to her unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy,</p>
<p>to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea.Mrs. Collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as much as possible</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 34</head>
<p>When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself asmuch as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since her being in</p>
<p>complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering. But in all, and in almost every line of each,there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at easewith itself and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded.Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it</p>
<p>of what misery he had been able to inflict,</p>
<p>It was some consolation to think thathis visit to Rosings was to</p>
<p>she should herself be with Jane again, , and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.</p>
<p>She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering that his cousin was to go with</p>
<p>Colonel Fitzwilliam hadmade it clear that he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him.</p>
<p>While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the door-bell, and herspirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in the evening, and mightnow come to inquire particularly after her. But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently affected, when, to her utteramazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health,</p>
<p>a wish of hearing that shewere better.She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, and then getting up, walkedabout the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word. After a silence of several minutes he came towards her in an agitated manner, and</p>
<p>“In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not be repressed. Youmust allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and love you.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent.This he considered sufficient encouragement; and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her, immediately followed. He spoke well;but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride. His</p>
<p>being a degradation &#8212; of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed to inclination,were dwelt on with a warmthwhich seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his</p>
<p>man's affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till, roused toresentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he</p>
<p>He concluded with representing to her</p>
<p>which, in spite of all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer;and with expressing his hope thatit would now be rewarded by her</p>
<p>favourable answer.</p>
<p>Such a circumstance could only exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into her</p>
<p>obligation for the sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation should be felt, and if I could <hirend="i(1)">feel gratitude, I would now thank you. But I cannot &#8212; I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainlybestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will be ofshort duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long prevented the acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty in overcoming</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantlepiece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed tocatch her words with no less resentment than surprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in everyfeature. He was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The pause was</p>
<p>At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said,</p>
<p>“And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting! I might,perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little endeavour at civility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.”</p>
<p>“I might as well inquire,”</p>
<p>“why with so evident a desire of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell methat you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character? Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I <hirend="i(1)">was uncivil? But I have other provocations. You know I have. Had not my own feelings decided against you &#8212; had they beenindifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of</p>
<p>As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and helistened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued:</p>
<p>“I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive can excuse the</p>
<p>means of dividing them from each other &#8212; of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, and the other to its</p>
<p>She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which provedhim wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.</p>
<p>“I have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to separate my friendfrom your sister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards him I have been kinder than towards myself.”</p>
<p>escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.</p>
<p>“on which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you wasdecided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I received many months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have to say?In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself? or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?”</p>
<p>said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.</p>
<p>“Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling an interest in him?”</p>
<p>cried Elizabeth with energy.</p>
<p>You have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him. You have deprived the best years of his life of thatindependence which was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this! and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt</p>
<p>cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,“is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me! I thank you forexplaining it so fully. My faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps,” added he, stopping in his walk, and turningtowards her, “these offenses might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had longprevented my forming any serious design. These bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greater policy, concealed my struggles,</p>
<p>disguise of every sort is my abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural and just. Could you expect me to rejoice inthe inferiority of your connections? &#8212; to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath myown?”</p>
<p>Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to the utmost to speakwith composure when she said:</p>
<p>affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike</p>
<p>She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued:</p>
<p>“You could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way that would</p>
<p>Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingledincredulity and mortification. She went on:</p>
<p>my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of thefeelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I hadnot known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.”</p>
<p>now only to be ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health</p>
<p>And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard him the next moment open the</p>
<p>The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not how to support herself, and fromactual weakness sat down and cried for half-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of</p>
<p>offer of marriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her for so many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spiteof all the objections which had made him prevent his friend's marrying her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case&#8212; was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominable pride&#8212; his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to Jane &#8212; his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could notjustify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny,</p>
<p>which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited. She continued in veryagitating reflections till the sound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte's observation, andhurried her away to her room.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 35</head>
<p>Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditationswhich had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anything</p>
<p>She was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy'ssometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she turned up the lane, which led her farther from the turnpike-road. Thepark paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground.</p>
<p>After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was tempted, by thepleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had made a greatdifference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk, when shecaught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, shewas directly retreating. But the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name. Shehad turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate. He had bythat time reached it also, and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, “I have been walkingin the grove some time in the hope of meeting you. Will you do me the honour of reading that letter?” And then, with a slight bow, turned againinto the plantation, and was soon out of sight.</p>
<p>With no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter,and, to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite through, in a very close hand. Theenvelope itself was likewise full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the morning,and was as follows:&#8212;</p>
<p>containing any repetition of those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting to you. I write without anyintention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and theeffort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to bewritten and read. You must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which I demand your attention; your feelings, I know, will bestow itunwillingly, but I demand it of your justice.</p>
<p>“Two offenses of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude,you last night laid to my charge. The first mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley from your</p>
<p>blasted the prospects of Mr. Wickham. Wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of myfather, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would bea depravity, to which the separation of two young persons, whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison.But from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall hope to be in the futuresecured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read. If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself, Iam under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry. &#8212; The necessity must beobeyed, and further apology would be absurd. "I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with others, that Bingleypreferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country. &#8212; But it was not till the evening of the dance at Netherfield thatI had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment. &#8212; I had often seen him in love before. At that ball, while I had the honourof dancing with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions to your sister had</p>
<p>of which the time alone could be undecided.</p>
<p>that his partiality for Miss Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him. Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners were open,cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained convinced from the evening's scrutiny, that thoughshe received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment. If you have notbeen mistaken here, I must have been in an error. Your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable.</p>
<p>assert, that the serenity of your sister's countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, howeveramiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain &#8212; but Iwill venture to say that my investigation and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe her to beindifferent because I wished it; I believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in reason. My objections to the marriage werenot merely those which I last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own case; the want ofconnection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me. But there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though stillexisting, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me.These causes must be stated, though briefly. The situation of your mother's family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison to thattotal want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your</p>
<p>censure, is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your elder sister, than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both. I willonly say farther that from what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened which could haveled me before, to preserve my friend from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. He left Netherfield for London, on the day following, asyou, I am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning. "The part which I acted is now to be explained. His sisters' uneasiness hadbeen equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detachingtheir brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. &#8212; We accordingly went &#8212; and there I readily engaged in theoffice of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described, and enforced them earnestly. But, however thisremonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, I do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it</p>
<p>affection with sincere, if not with equal regard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgement than onhis own. To convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself, was no very difficult point. To persuade him against returning intoHertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I cannot blame myself for having done thus much. Thereis but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that I condescended to adopt the measuresof art so far as to conceal from him your sister's being in town. I knew it myself, as it was known to Miss Bingley; but her brother is evenyet ignorant of it. &#8212; That they might have met without ill consequence is perhaps probabe; but his regard did not appear to me enoughextinguished for him to see her without some danger. Perhaps this concealment, this disguise was beneath me; it is done, however, and it wasdone for the best. &#8212; On this subject I have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer. If I have wounded your sister's feelings, itwas unknowingly done and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, I have not yet learnt to condemnthem. "With respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured Mr. Wickham, I can only refute it by laying before you the wholeof his connection with my family. Of what he has particularly accused me I am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shallrelate, I can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity. "Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many yearsthe management of all the Pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be ofservice to him; and on George Wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed. My father supported him at school,and afterwards at Cambridge &#8212; most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would havebeen unable to give him a gentleman's education. My father was not only fond of this young man's society, whose manners were always engaging;he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it. As for myself, it ismany, many years since I first began to think of him in a very different manner. The vicious propensities &#8212; the want of principle, whichhe was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age withhimself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which Mr. Darcy could not have. Here again I shall give you pain&#8212; to what degree you only can tell. But whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall</p>
<p>attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will</p>
<p>advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow &#8212; and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be</p>
<p>There was also a legacy of one thousand pounds. His own father did not longsurvive mine, and within half a year from these events,Mr. Wickham wrote to inform me that,</p>
<p>of the preferment, by which he could not be benefited.</p>
<p>of studying the law,and I must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein.I rather wished, than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready toaccede to his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wickham ought not to be a clergyman; the business was therefore soon settled &#8212; he resigned allclaim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousandpounds. All connection between us seemed now dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to Pemberley, or admit his society in town. Intown I believe he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence, and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life ofidleness and dissipation. For about three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been</p>
<p>were exceedingly</p>
<p>He had found the lawa most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I would present him to the living in question &#8212; ofwhich he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had no other person to provide for, and I could not have forgotten</p>
<p>You will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or forresisting every repetition to it. His resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstances &#8212; and he was doubtless asviolent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself. After this period every appearance of acquaintance was dropped. How helived I know not. But last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice. "I must now mention a circumstance which I would wish toforget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being. Having said thus much, I feel nodoubt of your secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's nephew, ColonelFitzwilliam, and myself. About a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed for her in London; and last summer she wentwith the lady who presided over it, to Ramsgate; and thither also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been aprior acquaintance between him and Mrs. Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid, he so farrecommended himself to Georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she waspersuaded to believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement. She was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after statingher imprudence, I am happy to add, that I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intendedelopement, and then Georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father,acknowledged the whole to me. You may imagine what I felt and how I acted. Regard for my sister's credit and feelings prevented any publicexposure; but I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who left the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of course removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham'schief object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but I cannot help supposing that the hope of revenginghimself on me was a strong inducement. His revenge would have been complete indeed. "This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event inwhich we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me henceforth of crueltytowards Mr. Wickham. I know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he had imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to bewondered at. Ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either, detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainlynot in your inclination. "You may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night; but I was not then master enough of myself to knowwhat could or ought to be revealed. For the truth of everything here related, I can appeal more particularly to the testimony of ColonelFitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and, still more, as one of the executors of my father's will, has beenunavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions. If your abhorrence of me should make <hi rend="i(1)"</p>
<p>of consulting him, I shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning. I will only</p>
<p>“Fitzwilliam Darcy”</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 36</head>
<p>If Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it tocontain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents. But such as they were, it may well be supposed how eagerlyshe went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined.</p>
<p>be in his power;</p>
<p>steadfastly was she persuaded, that</p>
<p>explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal.With a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what hadhappened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, and from impatience of knowing what the nextsentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's insensibility she instantlyresolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice. Heexpressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was all pride and insolence.</p>
<p>But when this subject was succeeded by his account of Mr. Wickham &#8212; when she read withsomewhat clearer attention a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which bore so alarming anaffinity to his own history of himself &#8212; her feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition. Astonishment,apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming,</p>
<p>&#8212; and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of thelast page or two, put it hastily away,</p>
<p>she would not regard</p>
<p>would never look in it</p>
<p>In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but itwould not do; in half a minute the letter was unfolded again, and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal</p>
<p>connection with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,though she had not before known its extent,agreed equally well withhis own words. So far each recital confirmed the other;but when she came to the will, the difference was great. What Wickham had said of the living wasfresh in her memory, and as she recalled his very words,it was impossible not to feel thatthere was gross duplicity</p>
<p>and, for a few moments,</p>
<p>her wishes did not</p>
<p>But when she read and re-read with the closest attention, the particulars immediately followingof Wickham's resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds, again was sheforced to hesitate. She put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartiality &#8212; deliberated on theprobability of each statement &#8212; but with little success.On both sides it was only</p>
<p>which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as</p>
<p>was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.</p>
<p>general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay at Mr. Wickham's charge,</p>
<p>before his entrance into the &#8212;&#8212;shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who, on meeting himaccidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he toldhimself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring.</p>
<p>which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years' continuance. But no such recollection</p>
<p>the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point aconsiderable while, she once more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmationfrom what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of everyparticular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself &#8212; from whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousin'saffairs, and whose character she had no reason to question. At one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked bythe awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy would never havehazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin's corroboration.</p>
<p>She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and herself,in their first evening at Mr . Phillips's. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory.She was now struck with</p>
<p>communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped her before.She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of hisprofessions with his conduct.</p>
<p>avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week.</p>
<p>had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal it had been everywhere discussed; that he hadthen no reserves, no scruples in sinking Mr. Darcy's character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his</p>
<p>How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss Kingwere now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes,</p>
<p>anything. His behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had beengratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which</p>
<p>shown.Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in farther justification of</p>
<p>she could not but allow thatMr. Bingley, whenquestioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in thewhole course of their acquaintance &#8212; an acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy withhis ways &#8212; seen any thing that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust &#8212; anything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits;that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued &#8212; that even Wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often</p>
<p>what Mr. Wickham represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendshipbetween a person capable of it, and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley, was incomprehensible.</p>
<p>She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think without</p>
<p>“How despicably I have acted!”</p>
<p>“I, who have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have valued myself on myabilities! who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliatingis this discovery! Yet, how just a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love, has been myfolly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courtedprepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away, where either were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself.”</p>
<p>From herself to Jane &#8212; from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon</p>
<p>and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal.How could she deny thatcredit to his assertions in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other?</p>
<p>and she could not help remembering what Charlotte's opinion had always been. Neither could she</p>
<p>fervent, were little displayed, and</p>
<p>there was a constantcomplacency in her air and manner not often united with great sensibility.</p>
<p>When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned in terms of suchmortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial, and thecircumstances to which he particularly alluded as having passed at the Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not</p>
<p>The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but it could not consoleher for the contempt which had thus been self-attracted by the rest of her family;</p>
<p>in fact been the work of her nearest relations,</p>
<p>how materially the credit</p>
<p>beyond anything she had ever known before.</p>
<p>After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought &#8212;re-considering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue,and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual,</p>
<p>She was immediately told thatthe two gentlemen fromRosings had each called during her absence; Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave &#8212; but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sittingwith them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found.</p>
<p>rejoiced at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an object; she could think only of her letter.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 37</head>
<p>The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins havingbeen in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in very</p>
<p>hastened, to console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from</p>
<p>to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with her.</p>
<p>Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that,</p>
<p>nor could she think, without a smile,of what her ladyship'sindignation would have been.“What would she have said? how would she have behaved?” were questions with which she amused</p>
<p>Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party.</p>
<p>attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear</p>
<p>Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by</p>
<p>“But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may stay alittle longer. Mrs. Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure.”</p>
<p>“but it is not in my power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday.”</p>
<p>“Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to staytwo months. I told Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could certainly spare you for</p>
<p>“But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return.”</p>
<p>so much consequence to a father. And if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take one of you asfar as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room forone of you &#8212; and indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.”</p>
<p>“You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our original plan.”</p>
<p>“Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with them. You know I always speak my mind,and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have thegreatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly guarded and attended, according to their situation inlife. When my niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made a point of her having two men-servants go with her .&#8212; Miss Darcy, thedaughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner. I am excessively attentive toall those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be</p>
<p>who thinks of these things. Where shall you change horses? Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the Bell, you will be attended to.”</p>
<p>answer them all herself, attention was necessary,which Elizabeth believed to belucky for her; or, with amind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be reserved for solitary hours;whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went bywithout a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections.</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She studied every sentence;and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different.</p>
<p>she was still full of indignation;but when she consideredhow unjustly she had</p>
<p>her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of</p>
<p>In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and in the</p>
<p>They were hopeless ofremedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and hermother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible of the evil.Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of Catherine</p>
<p>but while they weresupported by their mother's indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement?Catherine, weak-spirited,irritable, and completely under Lydia's guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would scarcelygive them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while Meryton waswithin a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there forever.</p>
<p>Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's explanation, byrestoring Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost.His affection was proved</p>
<p>How grievous then was</p>
<p>every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!</p>
<p>When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's character, it may be easilybelieved that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to</p>
<p>Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay as they had beenat first. The very last evening was spent there; and</p>
<p>was so urgent</p>
<p>gowns in the only right way,that Maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack</p>
<p>Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 38</head>
<p>On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a fewminutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.</p>
<p>“I know not, Miss Elizabeth,”</p>
<p>“whether Mrs. Collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us;but I am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it. The favor of your company has been much felt, I assureyou. We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms and few domestics, and thelittle we see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for thecondescension, and that we have done everything in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness.She had spent six weeks withgreat enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must make her feel the</p>
<p>Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling solemnity replied:</p>
<p>We have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and, from our connectionwith Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have beenentirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few canboast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge that, with all thedisadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at</p>
<p>Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about theroom, while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences.</p>
<p>cousin. I flatter myself at least that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you have been a daily witnessof; and altogether I trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate &#8212; but on this point it will be as well to be silent.Only let me assure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear Charlotte andI have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us. We seem to</p>
<p>it was a great happinesswhere that was the case,</p>
<p>with equal sincerity could add, that</p>
<p>She was not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the ladyfrom whom they sprang.Poor Charlotte! it was</p>
<p>But she had chosen it withher eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her</p>
<p>At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it waspronounced to be ready. After an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended to the carriage by Mr. Collins, and as theywalked down the gardenhe was commissioning her with</p>
<p>he had received at Longbourn in the winter, and his compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown.He then handed her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed,whenhe suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that</p>
<p>“you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with yourgrateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove</p>
<p>cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence,“it seems but a day or two since we first came! and yet how many things have</p>
<p>said her companion with a sigh.</p>
<p>“We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice! How much I</p>
<p>“And how much I shall have</p>
<p>Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hours oftheir leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's house, where they were to remain a few days.</p>
<p>Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst thevarious engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them.But Jane was to go homewith her, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.</p>
<p>It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Longbourn, before she toldher sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the sametime, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could</p>
<p>the state of indecision in which she remainedas to the extent of what</p>
<p>subject, of being hurried into repeating something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister further.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 39</head>
<p>It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set outtogether from Gracechurch Street, for the town of &#8212;&#8212; in Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet'scarriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's punctuality, both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-roomupstairs. These two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard,</p>
<p>After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as</p>
<p>“And we mean to treat you all,”</p>
<p>“but you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.”Then showing her purchases &#8212; “Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it</p>
<p>And when</p>
<p>she added, with perfect unconcern,</p>
<p>“Oh! but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought someprettier-coloured satin to trim it with fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this summer,</p>
<p>cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.</p>
<p>“They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to take us allthere for the summer! It would be such a delicious scheme; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to go too of allthings! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!”</p>
<p>“that would be a delightful scheme indeed, and completely do forus at once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia, and the</p>
<p>“Now I have got some news for you,”said Lydia, as they sat down at table.“What do you think? It is excellent news &#8212; capital news &#8212; and about acertain person that we all like!”</p>
<p>the waiter was told that</p>
<p>“Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter mustnot hear, as if he cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I am glad he is gone. Inever saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no dangerof Wickham's marrying Mary King. There's for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe.”</p>
<p>“She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.”</p>
<p>“I am sure there is not on his. I will answer for it, he nevercared three straws about her &#8212; who could about such a nasty little freckled thing?”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was shocked to think that,however incapable of suchcoarseness of expression herself, the coarseness of the sentiment was little other than her own breast</p>
<p>As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and after somecontrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of Kitty's and Lydia's purchases, were</p>
<p>“How nicely we are all crammed in,”</p>
<p>Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to youall since you went away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husbandbefore you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not beingmarried before three-and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to get husbands, you can't think.</p>
<p>but I do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord!how I should like to be married before any of you; and then I would chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we had such a good piece of funthe other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend the day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (bythe bye, Mrs. Forster and me are such friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Penwas forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a lady,only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one ofher gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they did notknow him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so did Mrs. Forster. I thought I should have died. And that made the mensuspect something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.”</p>
<p>hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no</p>
<p>Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty;</p>
<p>Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hearthe news; and various were the subjects that occupied them; Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria across the table, after the welfare and poultry ofher eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way belowher, and, on the other, retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's, was enumeratingthe various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.</p>
<p>“I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! As we went along, Kitty and I drewup all the blinds, and pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we gotto the George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you wouldhave gone, we would have treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I thought we never should have got into the coach. I wasready to die of laughter. And then we were so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles</p>
<p>“Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They woulddoubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would have no charms for me&#8212; I should</p>
<p>But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to anybody for more than half a</p>
<p>In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Meryton, and to see howeverybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme.</p>
<p>the Miss Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.There was another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr. Wickham again,</p>
<p>was resolved</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">her, of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go &#8212; and once</p>
<p>which Lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent discussion between her parents.Elizabeth saw directly that</p>
<p>smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 40</head>
<p>Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could nolonger be overcome; and at length, resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised,she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and herself.</p>
<p>Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made anyadmiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings.She was sorry that</p>
<p>was she grieved forthe unhappiness which her</p>
<p>“His being so sure of succeeding was wrong,”</p>
<p>“and certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his</p>
<p>“I am heartily sorry for him; but he has other feelings, which will probably soondrive away his regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?”</p>
<p>“But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?”</p>
<p>“No &#8212; I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.”</p>
<p>“But you will know it, when I tell you what happened the very</p>
<p>She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concernedGeorge Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane! who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickednessexisted in the whole race of mankind, as was here collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy's vindication, though grateful to her feelings,capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear the one without</p>
<p>“This will not do,”</p>
<p>“you never will be able to make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, butyou must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it</p>
<p>It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane.</p>
<p>“I do not know when I have been more shocked,”</p>
<p>consider what he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thing of</p>
<p>“Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both. Iknow you will do him such ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion makes me saving; and ifyou lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.”</p>
<p>“There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young</p>
<p>without any reason. It is such a spur to one's genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually abusivewithout saying anything just; but one cannot always be laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.”</p>
<p>“Lizzy, when you first read that letter, I am sure you could not treat the matter asyou do now.”</p>
<p>“Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough. I was very uncomfortable, I may sayunhappy. And with no one to speak to about what I felt, no Jane to comfort me and say that I had not been so very weak and vain and nonsensical asI knew I had! Oh! how I wanted you!”</p>
<p>“How unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speakingof Wickham to Mr. Darcy, for now they do appear wholly undeserved.”</p>
<p>“Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most naturalconsequence of the prejudices I had been encouraging. There is one point on which I want your advice. I want to be told whether I ought, or ought</p>
<p>“Surely there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully. What is your own</p>
<p>communication public. On the contrary, every particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and if Iendeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct, who will believe me? The general prejudice against Mr. Darcy is so violent, that itwould be the death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to it. Wickham will soon begone; and therefore it will not signify to anyone here what he really is. Some time hence it will be all found out, and then we may laugh at theirstupidity in not knowing it before. At present I will say nothing about it.”</p>
<p>now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to re-establish a character. We must not make him desperate.”</p>
<p>The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this conversation. She had got rid of two of thesecrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either.But there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Mr. Darcy's letter,nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend.Here was knowledge in which</p>
<p>she was sensible that</p>
<p>understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery.</p>
<p>event should ever take place, I shall merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself. The liberty of</p>
<p>She was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sister's</p>
<p>Jane was not happy.</p>
<p>Having never even fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first</p>
<p>remembrance, and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite tocheck the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their tranquillity.</p>
<p>“what is your opinion now of this sad business of</p>
<p>Jane saw anything of him in London. Well, he is a very undeserving young man &#8212; and I do not suppose there's the least chance in the world ofher ever getting him now. There is no talk of his coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have inquired of everybody too, who is likelyto know.”</p>
<p>“I do not believe he will ever live at Netherfield any more.”</p>
<p>“Oh well! it is just as he chooses. Nobody wants him to come. Though Ishall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and if I was her, I would not have put up with it. Well, my comfort is, I am sure Janewill die of a broken heart; and then he will be sorry for what he has done.”</p>
<p>But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation, she made no answer.</p>
<p>continued her mother, soon afterwards,“and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they? Well, well, I onlyhope it will last. And what sort of table do they keep? Charlotte is an excellent manager, I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">They will take care not to outrun their income. They will never be distressed for money. Well, much goodmay it do them! And so, I suppose, they often talk of having Longbourn when your father is dead. They look upon it as quite their own, I dare say,whenever that happens.”</p>
<p>“It was a subject which they could not mention before me.”</p>
<p>“No; It would have been strange if they had; but I make no doubt theyoften talk of it between themselves. Well, if they can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better. <hi rend="i(1)">I should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.”</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 41</head>
<p>The first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was thelast of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost universal. Theelder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very frequently were theyreproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of</p>
<p>“Good Heaven! what is to become of us? What are we to do?”would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe.“How can you be smiling so, Lizzy?”</p>
<p>she remembered what</p>
<p>similar occasion, five-and-twenty years ago.</p>
<p>“I cried for two days together when Colonel Miller's regiment went away.</p>
<p>“A little sea-bathing would set me up forever.”</p>
<p>“And my aunt Phillips is sure it would do me a great deal of</p>
<p>Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn House. Elizabethtried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame.She felt anew</p>
<p>objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.</p>
<p>But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation fromMrs. Forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very</p>
<p>three months' acquaintance they had been intimate two.</p>
<p>Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister's feelings, Lydia flew about the house inrestless ecstasy, calling for everyone's congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kittycontinued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.</p>
<p>“I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask me as well as</p>
<p>right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia,</p>
<p>as the death warrant of all</p>
<p>must make her were it known,</p>
<p>Lydia's general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of herbeing yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must be greater than at home.</p>
<p>“Lydia will never be easy until she has exposed herself in some public place orother, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances.”</p>
<p>“If you were aware,”</p>
<p>“of the very great disadvantage to us all which must arise from the public notice ofLydia's unguarded and imprudent manner &#8212; nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the affair.”</p>
<p>“What, has she frightened away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not becast down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of thepitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia's folly.”</p>
<p>but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world must be affected by the wild volatility, theassurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia's character. Excuse me, for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not takethe trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soonbe beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made herself orher family ridiculous; a flirt too, in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person;and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admirationwill excite. In this danger Kitty also is comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled!Oh! my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet saw thather whole heart was in the</p>
<p>“Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known you must berespected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of &#8212; or I may say, three &#8212; very silly sisters. Weshall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out ofany real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of less importance even as a commonflirt than she has been here. The officers will find women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach herher own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorising us to lock her up for the rest of her life.”</p>
<p>With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, andshe left him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of havingperformed her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.</p>
<p>Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, theirindignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility.</p>
<p>She saw, with the creative eye of fancy,</p>
<p>bathing-place covered with officers.She saw</p>
<p>attention, to tens and to scores of them at present unknown.She saw</p>
<p>&#8212; its tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, tocomplete the view,she saw</p>
<p>tent, tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once.</p>
<p>Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities asthese, what would have been her sensations? They could have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.</p>
<p>was all that consoled her</p>
<p>But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures continued, with little</p>
<p>Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been frequently in company withhim since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations of formal partiality entirely so.</p>
<p>which had first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary.</p>
<p>inclination he soon testified of renewing those intentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what had</p>
<p>and while she steadily repressed it,</p>
<p>his believing, that however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and her preferencesecured at any time by their renewal.</p>
<p>On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at Meryton, he dined, with others of theofficers, at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some inquiry as to the manner inwhich her time had passed at Hunsford,</p>
<p>Colonel Fitzwilliam's andMr. Darcy's having both spent three weeks at Rosings,</p>
<p>if he was acquainted with</p>
<p>He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's recollection and a returning</p>
<p>he was a very gentlemanlike</p>
<p>how she had liked him.Her answer was warmly in his favour. With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added:</p>
<p>“How long did you say he was at Rosings?”</p>
<p>“Nearly three weeks.”</p>
<p>“And you saw him frequently?”</p>
<p>cried Mr. Wickham with a look which did not escape her.</p>
<p>ordinary style? &#8212; for I dare not hope,” he continued in a lower and more serious tone, “that he is improved in essentials.”</p>
<p>“In essentials, I believe, he is very much what he ever was.”</p>
<p>While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words, or todistrust their meaning. There was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she</p>
<p>his manners were in a state of improvement, but that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.”</p>
<p>Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minutes hewas silent, till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents:</p>
<p>“You, who so well know my feeling towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend howsincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right. His pride, in that direction,</p>
<p>the sort of cautiousness to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion andjudgement he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to hiswish of forwarding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am certain he has very much at heart.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of</p>
<p>She saw thathe wanted to engage her on</p>
<p>and she was in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with the <hi rend="i(1)">appearance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual</p>
<p>When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton, from whence they were toset out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears;but she did weep from vexation and envy.Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes</p>
<p>advice which there was every reason to believe would be well attended to; and in the clamoroushappiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 42</head>
<p>Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not</p>
<p>good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind, had very early in theirmarriage put an end to all real affection for her. Respect, esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happinesswere overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on, in any ofthose pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of the country and of books; and from thesetastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as her ignorance and folly had contributed tohis amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of entertainment arewanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her father's behaviour as ahusband. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavouredto forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposinghis wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible. Butshe had never felt so strongly as nowthe disadvantages which</p>
<p>nor ever been so fully aware of</p>
<p>ill-judged a direction of talents; talents, which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even ifincapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.</p>
<p>satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties abroad were less varied than before, and at home she had a mother and sister whoseconstant repinings at the dullness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and,</p>
<p>regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might beapprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp.Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes found before, that an event towhich she had been looking with impatient desire did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It wasconsequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity &#8212; to have some other point on which her wishes and</p>
<p>Her tour to the Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which thediscontentedness of her mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been</p>
<p>“that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, mydisappointment would be certain. But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister's absence, I may reasonably hope tohave all my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointmentis only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.”</p>
<p>When Lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty;but her letters were always long expected, and always very short. Those to her mother contained little else, than thatthey were just returned fromthe library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she hada new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster calledher, and they were going off to the camp;and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less to be learnt &#8212; for herletters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to be made public.</p>
<p>After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good humour, and cheerfulnessbegan to reappear at Longbourn. Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came back again, and summerfinery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and, by the middle of June, Kitty was so muchrecovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears; an event of such happy promise as</p>
<p>by the following Christmas</p>
<p>The time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching, and afortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner would beprevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again within a month, and as that left too short aperiod for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, theywere obliged to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour, and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther northwardsthan Derbyshire. In that county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks;and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerlypassed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebratedbeauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.</p>
<p>was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing the Lakes, and</p>
<p>But it was her business to be satisfied &#8212; and certainly her temper to be happy; and allwas soon right again.</p>
<p>With the mention of Derbyshire there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to seethe word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner.</p>
<p>“I may enter his county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars without</p>
<p>The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle andaunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at Longbourn. The children, twogirls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the generalfavourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way &#8212; teaching them, playingwith them, and loving them.</p>
<p>The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth inpursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain &#8212; that of suitableness of companions; a suitableness which comprehended healthand temper to bear inconveniences &#8212; cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure &#8212; and affection and intelligence, which might supply itamong themselves if there were disappointments abroad.</p>
<p>It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire, nor of any of theremarkable places through which their route thither lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth, Birmingham, etc. are sufficiently known. A smallpart of Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's former residence, and where she hadlately learned that some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; andwithin five miles of Lambton,</p>
<p>Pemberley was situated. Itwas not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it.</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.</p>
<p>“My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so</p>
<p>“a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintances are connected. Wickhampassed all his youth there, you know.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was distressed.</p>
<p>and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it.She must own that she was</p>
<p>“If it were merely a fine house richly furnished,”</p>
<p>of the finest woods in the country.”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place,</p>
<p>It would be dreadful!</p>
<p>it would be better to speak</p>
<p>But against this there were objections; and</p>
<p>resource, if her private inquiries as to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.</p>
<p>Accordingly, when she retired at night,</p>
<p>whether Pemberley were not avery fine place? what was the name of its proprietor? and,with no little alarm,whether the family were down</p>
<p>A most welcome negative followed the last question &#8212; and her alarms now being removed, shewas at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again</p>
<p>could readily answer,and with a proper air of indifference,</p>
<p>To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 43</head>
<p>Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance ofPemberley Woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.</p>
<p>The park was very large, and contained great variety of ground. They entered it in one of itslowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.</p>
<p>Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spotand point of view. They gradually ascended for half-a-mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the woodceased, and the eye was instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite side of a valley, into which the road with some abruptnesswound. It was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front, a streamof some natural importance was swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned.Elizabeth was delighted.</p>
<p>a place for which naturehad done more, or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste.They were all of them warm in their admiration;</p>
<p>They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining thenearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned.</p>
<p>On applying to see the place, they were admitted into the hall; andElizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder ather being where shewas.</p>
<p>elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil,</p>
<p>They followed her into the dining-parlour. It was a large, well proportioned room, handsomelyfitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The hill, crowned with wood, from which they haddescended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object. Every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked onthe whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As theypassed into other rooms these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty</p>
<p>but Elizabeth saw,with admiration of his taste,</p>
<p>it was neither gaudy noruselessly fine; with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of Rosings.</p>
<p>“I might have been mistress! With these rooms I might now have been familiarlyacquainted! Instead of viewing them as a stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt.</p>
<p>that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should not havebeen allowed to invite them.”</p>
<p>This was a lucky recollection &#8212; it saved her from something very like regret.</p>
<p>whether her master was</p>
<p>but had not the courage for it. At length however, the question was asked by her uncle; and sheturned away with alarm, while</p>
<p>he was,</p>
<p>“But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.”</p>
<p>How rejoiced was Elizabeth thattheir own journey had not by</p>
<p>Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She approached and saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham,</p>
<p>how she liked it.The housekeeper came forward, and</p>
<p>it was a picture of a younggentleman, the son of her late master's steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense.</p>
<p>“He is now gone into the army,”</p>
<p>“but I am afraid he has turned out very wild.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but Elizabeth could not return it.</p>
<p>“is my master &#8212; and very like him. It was drawn at the same time as the other</p>
<p>“it is a handsome face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Reynolds respect for Elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her</p>
<p>“Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy?”</p>
<p>“I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairsyou will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. This room was my late master's favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they usedto be then. He was very fond of them.”</p>
<p>Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of Miss Darcy, drawn when she was only eight</p>
<p>“Oh! yes &#8212; the handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so accomplished!&#8212; She plays and sings all day long. In the next room is a new instrument just come down for her &#8212; a present from my master; she comeshere to-morrow with him.”</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were very easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his</p>
<p>“Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he may spend half his time here;and Miss Darcy is always down for the summer months.”</p>
<p>"when she goes to Ramsgate.”</p>
<p>“If your master would marry, you might see more of him.”</p>
<p>“Yes, sir; but I do not know when that will be. I do not knowwho is good enough for him.”</p>
<p>“I say no more than the truth, and everybody will say that knows him,”replied the other. Elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with</p>
<p>“I have never known a cross word from him in my life, and I have known him ever sincehe was four years old.”</p>
<p>This was praise, of all</p>
<p>That he was not a</p>
<p>Her keenest attention was awakened; she longed to hear more, and was grateful to her uncle for</p>
<p>“There are very few people of whom so much can be said. You are lucky in having such</p>
<p>“Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the world, I could not meet with abetter. But I have always observed, that they who are good-natured when children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he was always thesweetest-tempered, most generous-hearted boy in the world.”</p>
<p>“His father was an excellent man,”</p>
<p>"Yes, ma'am, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like him &#8212; just as</p>
<p>Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest</p>
<p>Gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to thesubject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up the great staircase.</p>
<p>“that ever lived; not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing butthemselves. There is not one of his tenants or servants but what will give him a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am sure I never sawanything of it. To my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.”</p>
<p>“In what an amiable light does this place him!”</p>
<p>whispered her aunt as they walked,is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.”</p>
<p>“Perhaps we might be deceived.”</p>
<p>“That is not very likely; our authority was too good.”</p>
<p>were shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightnessthan the apartments below; andwere informed thatit was but just done to givepleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to the room when last at Pemberley.</p>
<p>said Elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.</p>
<p>Miss Darcy's delight, when she</p>
<p>“And this is always the way with him,”</p>
<p>nothing he would not do for her.”</p>
<p>The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were all that remained to beshown. In the former were many good paintings; but Elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already visible below, she hadwillingly turned to look at some drawings of Miss Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and also more</p>
<p>In the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attentionof a stranger. Elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her. At last it arrested her &#8212; and she beheld</p>
<p>with such a smile over theface as she remembered to have sometimes seen when he looked at her.</p>
<p>There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's mind, a more gentle sensation towards the</p>
<p>The commendation bestowedon him by Mrs. Reynolds was of no trifling nature.</p>
<p>how many people's happinesswere in his guardianship! &#8212; how much of pleasure or pain was it in his power to bestow! &#8212; how much of good or evil must be done by</p>
<p>brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character,and as she stood before the canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself,she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and softened its</p>
<p>When all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returneddownstairs, and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.</p>
<p>As they walked across the lawn towards the river, Elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle</p>
<p>while the former was conjecturing</p>
<p>the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind it to the</p>
<p>They were within twenty yards of each other, and so abrupt was his appearance, that it wasimpossible to avoid his sight. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of both were overspread with the deepest blush. He absolutely started, andfor a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in terms</p>
<p>She had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with</p>
<p>insufficient to assure the other two thatthey now saw Mr.</p>
<p>They stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused,scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family. Amazed at the alterationof his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and</p>
<p>the few minutes in which they continued together, were some of the most uncomfortable in herlife. Nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and</p>
<p>so often, and in so hurried a way,</p>
<p>At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after standing a few moments without saying aword, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.</p>
<p>word, and wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence. She was overpowered by shame and vexation.Her coming there was themost unfortunate, the most ill-judged thing in the world! How strange it must appear to him! In what a disgraceful light might it not strike sovain a man! It might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh! why did she come? Or, why did he thus come a day before hewas expected? Had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was</p>
<p>strikingly altered &#8212; what could it mean? That he should even speak to her was amazing! &#8212; but to speak with such civility, to inquireafter her family! Never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpectedmeeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her hand!She knew not what to think, or how to account for it.</p>
<p>They had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringingforward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching; but it was some time before Elizabeth was sensibleof any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects</p>
<p>Her thoughts were all fixed</p>
<p>Pemberley House, whichever it might be, where Mr. Darcy then was.She longed to knowwhat at the moment waspassing in his mind &#8212; in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him.</p>
<p>only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been that in his voice which was not like ease.</p>
<p>seen her with composure.</p>
<p>At length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, and she</p>
<p>They entered the woods, and bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the highergrounds; when, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the opposite hills,with the long range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream.Mr. Gardiner expressed a wishof going round the whole</p>
<p>walk.With a triumphant smile they were told thatit was ten miles</p>
<p>It settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, aftersome time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They crossed it by a simple bridge, incharacter with the general air of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the valley, here contracted into aglen, allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bordered it. Elizabeth longed to explore itswindings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who was not a great walker, could go</p>
<p>Her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on theopposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the taste, wasvery fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man about them,that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's astonishment was quite equal towhat it had been at first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy approaching them, and at no great distance. The walk here being less sheltered than on theother side, allowed them to see him before they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than</p>
<p>with calmness, if he really intended to meet them.For a few moments, indeed,</p>
<p>he would probably strike</p>
<p>The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, hewas immediately before them.With a glance, she saw that</p>
<p>but she had not got beyond the words “delightful,” and “charming,” when some unlucky</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing,</p>
<p>if she would do him the honour</p>
<p>This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared;</p>
<p>at his being now seeking theacquaintance of some of those very people against whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself.</p>
<p>“What will be his surprise,"</p>
<p>"when he knows who they are? He takes them now for people of fashion.”</p>
<p>The introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to</p>
<p>stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, andwas not without the expectation</p>
<p>as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was surprised by the connection was evident; he sustained it, however,with fortitude,and so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with Mr.</p>
<p>It was consoling that heshould know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush.</p>
<p>listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and</p>
<p>sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility,</p>
<p>chose while he continued in the neighbourhood,</p>
<p>to supply him with fishing</p>
<p>those parts of the stream wherethere was usually most sport.Mrs. Gardiner, who was walking arm-in-arm with Elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of herwonder. Elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly;</p>
<p>Her astonishment, however, was extreme, and continually was she repeating,</p>
<p>“Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed? It cannot be for <hi rend="i(1)">me &#8212; it cannot be for my sake that his manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford could not work such a</p>
<p>After walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, onresuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there chanced to be alittle alteration. It originated in Mrs. Gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support,and consequently preferred her husband's. Mr. Darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together. After a short silence, the lady first</p>
<p>She wished him to know that</p>
<p>“informed us that you would certainly not be here till to-morrow; and indeed, beforewe left Bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.”</p>
<p>acknowledged the truth of it all, and</p>
<p>business with his steward hadoccasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling.</p>
<p>“They will join me early to-morrow,”</p>
<p>“and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you &#8212; Mr. Bingley</p>
<p>Elizabeth answered only by a slight bow. Her thoughts were instantly driven back to the timewhen Mr. Bingley's name had been the last mentioned between them; and, if she might judge by his complexion, his mind was not</p>
<p>“who more particularly wishes to be known to you. Will you allow me, or do I ask too</p>
<p>The surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what</p>
<p>whatever desire Miss Darcymight have of being acquainted with her must be the work of her brother, and, without looking farther, it was satisfactory;it was gratifying to know</p>
<p>They now walked on in silence, each of them deep in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; thatwas impossible; but she was flattered and pleased.His wish of introducinghis sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind.They soon outstripped the others, and when they had reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs. Gardinerwere half a quarter of a mile behind.</p>
<p>He then asked her to walk into the house &#8212; but she declared herself not tired, and theystood together on the lawn. At such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but there seemed to be anembargo on every subject. At last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of Matlock and Dove Dale with great perseverance.Yet time and her aunt moved slowly &#8212; and her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete was over. On Mr. and Mrs.Gardiner's coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each sidewith the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the</p>
<p>The observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and</p>
<p>“He is perfectly well behaved, polite, and unassuming,”</p>
<p>“but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming. I can now say with the</p>
<p>“I was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us. It was more than civil; itwas really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention. His acquaintance with Elizabeth was very trifling.”</p>
<p>his features are perfectly good. But how came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable?”</p>
<p>excused herself as well as she could;</p>
<p>when they met in Kent than before,</p>
<p>“But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities,”</p>
<p>“Your great men often are; and therefore I shall not take him at his word aboutfishing, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his grounds.”</p>
<p>“From what we have seen of him,”</p>
<p>“I really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way byanybody, as he has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured look. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when hespeaks. And there is something of dignity in his countenance that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the goodlady who showed us his house did give him a most flaming character! I could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I</p>
<p>by what she had heard fromhis relations in Kent, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor Wickham's</p>
<p>related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected,without actually naming her authority, but</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner was surprised and concerned; but as they were now approaching the scene of herformer pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all theinteresting spots in its environs, to think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the morning's walk they had no sooner dined than she setoff again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years'</p>
<p>The occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave Elizabeth much attention for anyof these new friends; and</p>
<p>and think with wonder,</p>
<p>wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 44</head>
<p>Elizabeth had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit</p>
<p>was consequently resolved</p>
<p>the inn the whole of that morning.But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own arrival at Lambton, thesevisitors came. They had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returning to the inn to dress themselves fordining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and a lady in a curricle driving up thestreet. Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of her surprise to her relations</p>
<p>with the honour which she</p>
<p>Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joinedto the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever</p>
<p>they now felt thatthere was no otherway of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece.While these newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth'sfeelings was at every moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet</p>
<p>every power of pleasingwould fail her.</p>
<p>She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room,endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.</p>
<p>her new acquaintance was at</p>
<p>Miss Darcy was</p>
<p>but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. Shefound it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.</p>
<p>Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen,her figure was formed, and her appearance womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother; but there was sense and good humour in herface, and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer asever Mr. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings.</p>
<p>Bingley was also coming towait on her;and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, whenBingley's quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All Elizabeth's anger against him had been long done away; buthad she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing heragain. He inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever</p>
<p>To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself. They hadlong wished to see him. The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just arisen of Mr. Darcy andtheir niece directed their observation towards each with an earnest though guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from those inquiries</p>
<p>knew what it was to love.</p>
<p>the gentleman wasoverflowing with admiration was evident enough.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of hervisitors; she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she wasmost sure of success, for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager,</p>
<p>In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and, oh! how ardently did she longto know whether any of his were directed in a like manner. Sometimes</p>
<p>once or twice pleased herself with the notion that,</p>
<p>he was trying to trace a</p>
<p>who had been set up as a rival to Jane.</p>
<p>side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister.On this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere theyparted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollectionof Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention ofher, had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it“was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her;” and, before she could reply, he added,</p>
<p>“It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were</p>
<p>Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; andhe afterwards took occasion to ask her,when unattended to by any of the rest,whether <hi rend="i(1)">all her sisters were at Longbourn.There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and amanner which gave them meaning.</p>
<p>It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but, whenever she did catcha glimpse, she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so far removed from hauteur or disdain of</p>
<p>which she had yesterday witnessed however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus seeking theacquaintance and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace &#8212; when she sawhim thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained,</p>
<p>was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible.</p>
<p>or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whomhis attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.</p>
<p>Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour, and when they arose to depart,</p>
<p>their wish of seeing Mr. and</p>
<p>Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations,readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom the invitation most concerned, feltdisposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentaryembarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, sheventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased, andon this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half-hour with somesatisfaction, though while it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from heruncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.</p>
<p>But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was not their wish to force</p>
<p>It was evident thatshe was much betteracquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love with her.They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.</p>
<p>Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintancereached, there was no fault to find. They could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character from their own feelings andhis servant's report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognized itfor Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper; and</p>
<p>servant who had known him since he was four years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected.</p>
<p>lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him of but pride;</p>
<p>had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town where the family did not visit.It was acknowledged, however, thathe was a liberal man,</p>
<p>With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in muchestimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-known fact that, on hisquitting Derbyshire, he had left many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.</p>
<p>As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and theevening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one in that mansion; andshe lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out.</p>
<p>The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillinglyadmitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feeling; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature, by thetestimony so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all, aboverespect and esteem, there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude;</p>
<p>having once loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all theunjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidentalmeeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their twoselves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of</p>
<p>her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she wasgrateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, andhow far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on herrenewal of his addresses.</p>
<p>It had been settled in the evening between the aunt and the niece, that</p>
<p>to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highlyexpedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning.They were, therefore, to go. Elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked herself the reason,</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before,</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 45</head>
<p>Convinced as Elizabeth now was that</p>
<p>how very unwelcome her</p>
<p>was curious to knowwith how much civility onthat lady's side the acquaintance would now be renewed.</p>
<p>On reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspectrendered it delightful for summer. Its windows opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house,and of the beautiful oaks and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.</p>
<p>In this house they were received by Miss Darcy, who was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and MissBingley, and the lady with whom she lived in London. Georgiana's reception of them was very civil, but attended with all the embarrassment which,though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her being proudand reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.</p>
<p>By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed only by a curtsey; and, on their being seated,a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-lookingwoman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly well-bred than either of the others; and between her andMrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Elizabeth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to joinin it; and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.</p>
<p>Elizabeth soon saw thatshe was herself closelywatched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her attention.This observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not</p>
<p>she was not sorry</p>
<p>Her own thoughts were employing her.</p>
<p>would enter the room.She wished, she feared that</p>
<p>might be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine.After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Miss Bingley's voice,Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family. She answered with equal indifference and brevity, and</p>
<p>The next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold</p>
<p>Annesley to Miss Darcy had been given, to remind her of her post. There was now employment for the whole party &#8212; for though they could not</p>
<p>whether she most feared orwished for the appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room;</p>
<p>her wishes to</p>
<p>He had been some time with Mr. Gardiner, who, with two or three other gentlemen from the house,was engaged by the river, and had left him</p>
<p>No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved</p>
<p>because she saw that</p>
<p>whole party were awakened against them,</p>
<p>there was scarcely an eyewhich did not watch his behaviour when he first came into the room.In no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite ofthe smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions toMr. Darcy were by no means over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's entrance, exerted herself much more to talk, andElizabeth saw thathe was anxious for hissister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side.Miss Bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunityof saying, with sneering civility:</p>
<p>he was uppermost in her</p>
<p>and the various recollections connected with him gave her a moment's distress; but exertingherself vigorously to repel the ill-natured attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably detached tone. While she spoke, aninvoluntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable tolift up her eyes. Had Miss Bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint; butshe had merely intended to discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial, to make her betray asensibility which might injure her in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part ofher family were connected with that corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss Darcy's meditated elopement. To no creature had it beenrevealed, where secrecy was possible, except to Elizabeth; and from all Bingley's connections her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it,from the very wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming hereafter her own. He had certainly formed such a plan, andwithout meaning that it should effect his endeavour to separate him from Miss Bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his livelyconcern for the welfare of his friend.</p>
<p>Elizabeth's collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed</p>
<p>brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair, and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn</p>
<p>Their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned; and while Mr.Darcy was attending them to their carriage Miss Bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth's person, behaviour, and dress. ButGeorgiana would not join her. Her brother's recommendation was enough to ensure her favour; his judgement could not err. And he had spoken in suchterms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon,Miss Bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.</p>
<p>“How very ill Miss Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr. Darcy,”</p>
<p>“I never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter. She isgrown so brown and coarse! Louisa and I were agreeing that we should not have known her again.”</p>
<p>However little Mr. Darcy might have liked such an address,he contented himself with coolly replying that</p>
<p>“For my own part,”</p>
<p>complexion has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants character &#8212; there is nothing marked in its lines. Herteeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anythingextraordinary in them. They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency withoutfashion, which is intolerable.”</p>
<p>Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this was not the best method ofrecommending herself; but angry people are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the success she expected.He was resolutely silent, however, and, from a determination of making him speak, she continued:</p>
<p>“I remember, when we first knew her in Hertfordshire, how amazed we all were to findthat she was a reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield, '<hi rend="i(1)">She a beauty! &#8212; I should as soon call her mother a wit.' But afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and I believe you thought her</p>
<p>replied Darcy, who could contain himself no longer,“but that was only when I first saw her, for it is many monthssince I have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.”</p>
<p>He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced him to saywhat gave no one any pain but herself.</p>
<p>returned, except what had particularly interested them both. The look and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed, except of theperson who had mostly engaged their attention. They talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit &#8212; of everything but himself; yetElizabeth was longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of him, and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by her niece's beginning the</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 46</head>
<p>Jane on their first arrival at Lambton; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on thethird her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that it had beenmissent elsewhere. Elizabeth was not surprised at it, as Jane had written the direction remarkably ill.</p>
<p>They had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her uncle and aunt, leaving herto enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves. The one missent must be first be attended to; it had been written five days ago. The beginningcontained an account of all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated aday later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this effect:</p>
<p>“Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has occurred of a most unexpectedand serious nature; but I am afraid of alarming you &#8212; be assured that we are all well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. An expresscame at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed, from Colonel Forster,</p>
<p>she was gone off toScotland with one of his officers; to own the truth, with Wickham!Imagine our surprise. To Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected. I amvery, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both sides! But I am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.</p>
<p>disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing. Our poor mother is sadly grieved. My father bears it better. How thankfulam I that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves. They were off Saturday night about twelve, as isconjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight. The express was sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed within</p>
<p>Lydia left a few linesfor his wife, informing her of</p>
<p>I must conclude, for I cannot be long from my poor mother. I am afraid you will notbe able to make it out, but I hardly know what I have written.”</p>
<p>Without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, Elizabethon finishing this letter instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later</p>
<p>“By this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; I wish thismay be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my head is so bewildered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest Lizzy, Ihardly know what I would write, but I have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent as the marriage between Mr. Wickham and our poorLydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to Scotland.</p>
<p>they were going to Gretna</p>
<p>something was dropped</p>
<p>which was repeated to Colonel F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B.</p>
<p>coach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the London road. Iknow not what to think. After making every possible inquiry on that side London, Colonel F. came on into Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them atall the turnpikes, and at the inns in Barnet and Hatfield, but without any success &#8212; no such people had been seen to pass through. With the</p>
<p>him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any blame on them. Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very great. My father and mother believe the worst, but Icannot think so ill of him. Many circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue their firstplan; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can Isuppose her so lost to everything? Impossible! I grieve to find, however, that</p>
<p>is not disposed to depend upon their marriage; he shook his head when I expressed my</p>
<p>he feared W. was not a man</p>
<p>My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room. Could she exert herself, it wouldbe better; but this is not to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my life saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having concealedtheir attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared something ofthese distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so selfish, however, as to pressfor it, if inconvenient. Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just told you I would not; but circumstances are such that I cannot helpearnestly begging you all to come here as soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though Ihave still something more to ask of the former. My father is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly, to try to discover her. What he meansto do I am sure I know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and Colonel Forster isobliged to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. In such an exigence, my uncle's advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he willimmediately comprehend what I must feel, and I rely upon his goodness.”</p>
<p>“Oh! where, where is my uncle?”cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him,without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door it was opened by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face andimpetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by Lydia's</p>
<p>“Good God! what is the matter?”cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself,“I will not detain you a minute; but let me, or let the servant go after Mr. and Mrs.Gardiner. You are not well enough; you cannot go yourself.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her and she felt how little would be gained by</p>
<p>On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to support herself, and looking so miserably ill,that it was impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration,</p>
<p>glass of wine; shall I get you one? You are very ill.”</p>
<p>“There is nothing the matter with me. I am quite well; I am only distressed by somedreadful news which I have just received from Longbourn.”</p>
<p>She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word.Darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his concern, and observe her in compassionate silence. At length she spoke</p>
<p>“I have just had a letter from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be concealedfrom anyone. My younger sister has left all her friends &#8212; has eloped; has thrown herself into the power of &#8212; of Mr. Wickham. They aregone off together from Brighton. You know him too well to doubt the rest. She has no money, no connections, nothing that can</p>
<p>Darcy was fixed in astonishment.</p>
<p>who knew what he was. Had I but explained some part of it only &#8212; some part of what I learnt, to my own family! Had his character been known,this could not have happened. But it is all &#8212; all too late now.”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes! They left Brighton together on Sunday night, and were traced almost to</p>
<p>“And what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?"</p>
<p>“My father is gone to London, and Jane has written to beg my uncle's immediateassistance; and we shall be off, I hope, in half-an-hour. But nothing can be done &#8212; I know very well that nothing can be done. How is such aman to be worked on? How are they even to be discovered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every way horrible!”</p>
<p>“When my eyes were opened to his real character &#8212; Oh! hadI known what I ought, what I dared to do! But I knew not &#8212; I was afraid of doing too much. Wretched, wretched mistake!”</p>
<p>Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room inearnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy.</p>
<p>Her power was sinking;everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace.She could neither wonder nor condemn, but the belief of his self-conquest brought nothingconsolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress. It was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her ownwishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him, as now, when all love must be vain.</p>
<p>But self, though it would intrude, could not engross her. Lydia &#8212; the humiliation, themisery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth was soon lost toeverything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in amanner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said,</p>
<p>consolation to such distress! But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This unfortunateaffair will, I fear, prevent my sister's having the pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.”</p>
<p>calls us home immediately. Conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible, I know it cannot be long.”</p>
<p>He readily assured her of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for her distress,wished</p>
<p>there was at present reason to hope,</p>
<p>with only one serious, parting look, went away.</p>
<p>As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see eachother again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in Derbyshire; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the wholeof their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted itscontinuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.</p>
<p>If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth's change of sentiment willbe neither improbable nor faulty. But if otherwise &#8212; if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural, in comparisonof what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be saidin her defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and that its ill success might,perhaps, authorise her to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go with regret; and in this earlyexample of what Lydia's infamy must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business. Never, since reading Jane's</p>
<p>could flatter herself with</p>
<p>Surprise was the least of her feelings on this development. While the contents of the firstletter remained in her mind, she was all surprise &#8212;</p>
<p>whom it was impossible he could marry for money;</p>
<p>how Lydia could ever have</p>
<p>But now it was all too</p>
<p>and though she did not suppose Lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement without theintention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy</p>
<p>She had never perceived, while the regiment was in Hertfordshire, that Lydia had any partiality</p>
<p>but she was convinced thatLydia had wanted only</p>
<p>her opinion. Her affections had continually been fluctuating but never without an object. The mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards</p>
<p>&#8212; oh! how acutely did she now feel it!</p>
<p>She was wild to be at home &#8212; to hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share with Jane in thecares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged,</p>
<p>misery of her impatience was severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing by the servant's account that their niece was takensuddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, anddwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy. Though Lydia had never been a favourite with them, Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner could not butbe deeply afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror, Mr. Gardiner readilypromised every assistance in his power. Elizabeth,though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated byone spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily settled. They were to be off as soon as possible.</p>
<p>“But what is to be done about Pemberley?”</p>
<p>“John told us Mr. Darcy was here when you sent for us; was it so?”</p>
<p>“Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep our engagement. <hi rend="i(1)"</p>
<p>“And are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth? Oh, that I knewhow it was!”</p>
<p>But wishes were vain, or at least could only serve to amuse her in the hurry and confusion ofthe following hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one sowretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all theirfriends at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed; and Mr. Gardiner meanwhile having</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 47</head>
<p>said her uncle, as they drove from the town;“and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I was to judgeas your eldest sister does on the matter. It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is byno means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonel's family, that I am strongly inclined to hope the best. Could heexpect that her friends would not step forward? Could he expect to be noticed again by the regiment, after such an affront to Colonel Forster? His</p>
<p>“Upon my word,”</p>
<p>decency, honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of it. I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. Can you yourself, Lizzy, so wholly give him up,</p>
<p>“Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of every other neglect I can</p>
<p>And, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the Barnet road.”</p>
<p>“But why all this secrecy? Why any fear of detection? Why must their marriage beprivate? Oh! no, no &#8212; this is not likely. His most particular friend, you see by Jane's account, was persuaded of his never intending tomarry her. Wickham will never marry a woman without some money. He cannot afford it. And what claims has Lydia &#8212; what attraction has shebeyond youth, health, and good humour that could make him, for her sake, forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well? As to whatrestraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with her, I am not able to judge; for I know nothingof the effects that such a step might produce. But as to your other objection, I am afraid it will hardly hold good. Lydia has no brothers to stepforward; and he might imagine, from my father's behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever seemed to give to what wasgoing forward in his family, that he would do as little, and think as little about it, as any father could do, in such a</p>
<p>to live with him on any terms other than marriage?”</p>
<p>“It does seem, and it is most shocking indeed,” replied Elizabeth, with tears in hereyes, “that a sister's sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt. But, really, I know not what to say. Perhaps I am not</p>
<p>twelvemonth &#8212; she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle andfrivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way. Since the &#8212;&#8212;shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,flirtation, and officers have been in her head. She has been doing everything in her power by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greater&#8212; what shall I call it? susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough. And we all know that Wickham has every charm ofperson and address that can captivate a woman.”</p>
<p>“Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is there, whatever might be their formerconduct, that she would think capable of such an attempt, till it were proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do, what Wickham reallyis. We both know that he has been profligate in every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and</p>
<p>“And do you really know all this?”</p>
<p>cried Mrs. Gardiner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.</p>
<p>when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him. And there areother circumstances which I am not at liberty &#8212; which it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about the whole Pemberley family areendless. From what he said of Miss Darcy I was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl. Yet he knew to the contraryhimself. He must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her.”</p>
<p>“But does Lydia know nothing of this? can she be ignorant of what you and Jane seemso well to understand?”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes! &#8212; that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in Kent, and saw so muchboth of Mr. Darcy and his relation Colonel Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth myself. And when I returned home, the &#8212;&#8212;shire wasto leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that was the case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole, nor I, thought it necessary tomake our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to any one, that the good opinion which all the neighbourhood had of him shouldthen be overthrown? And even when it was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never</p>
<p>rend="i(1)">this could ensue, you may easily believe, was far enough from my thoughts.”</p>
<p>anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away. When first he entered thecorps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all were. Every girl in or near Meryton was out of her senses about him for the first two</p>
<p>and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.”</p>
<p>It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added to their fears, hopes,and conjectures, on this interesting subject, by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during the whole of thejourney. From Elizabeth's thoughts it was never absent. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-reproach, she could find no interval of</p>
<p>It was a comfort to Elizabeth to consider that</p>
<p>wearied by long expectations.</p>
<p>The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing on the steps of thehouse as they entered the paddock; and, when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces, and displayeditself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.</p>
<p>where Jane, who came running down stairs from her mother's apartment, immediately met her.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both,</p>
<p>whether anything had been</p>
<p>“But now that my dear uncle is come, I hope everything will be well.”</p>
<p>“Is my father in town?”</p>
<p>“Yes, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word.”</p>
<p>“We have heard only once. He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday, to say that he hadarrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which I particularly begged him to do. He merely added that he should not write again till he</p>
<p>“And my mother &#8212; how is she? How are you all?”</p>
<p>“My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her spirits are greatly shaken. She isupstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all. She does not yet leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank Heaven, are quitewell.”</p>
<p>“But you &#8212; how are you?”</p>
<p>“You look pale. How much you must have gone through!”</p>
<p>Her sister, however, assured her</p>
<p>well;and their conversation, which had been passing while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were engaged withtheir children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with</p>
<p>When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions which Elizabeth had already asked were ofcourse repeated by the others, and they soon found that Jane had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good, however, which the</p>
<p>it would all end well, andthat every morning would bring some letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce their</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes' conversation together,received them exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous conduct of Wickham, andcomplaints of her own sufferings and ill-usage; blaming everybody but the person to whose ill-judging indulgence the errors of her daughter mustprincipally be owing.</p>
<p>“to carry my point in going to Brighton, with all my family, <hirend="i(1)">this would not have happened; but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out oftheir sight? I am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing if she had beenwell looked after. I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear child! And nowhere's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I know he will fight Wickham, wherever he meets him and then he will be killed, and what is to become of us all?The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold in his grave, and if you are not kind to us, brother, I do not know what we shall do.”</p>
<p>very next day, and would assist Mr. Bennet in every endeavour for recovering Lydia.</p>
<p>“Do not give way to useless alarm,”</p>
<p>“though it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on itas certain. It is not quite a week since they left Brighton. In a few days more we may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are notmarried, and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as lost. As soon as I get to town I shall go to my brother, and makehim come home with me to Gracechurch Street; and then we may consult together as to what is to be done.”</p>
<p>“that is exactly what I could most wish for. And now do, when you get totown, find them out, wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, make them marry. And as for wedding clothes,do not let them wait for that, but tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses, to buy them, after they are married. And, above allthings, keep Mr. Bennet from fighting. Tell him what a dreadful state I am in, that I am frighted out of my wits &#8212; and have such tremblings,</p>
<p>by day. And tell my dear Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does not know which are the bestwarehouses. Oh, brother, how kind you are! I know you will contrive it all."</p>
<p>moderation to her, as well in</p>
<p>and after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on the table, they all left her tovent all her feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.</p>
<p>Though her brother and sister were persuaded thatthere was no real</p>
<p>for they knew that</p>
<p>enough to hold her tongue before the servants, while they waited at table,</p>
<p>one only of the household, and the one whom they could most trust should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the</p>
<p>In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary and Kitty, who had been too busily engaged intheir separate apartments to make their appearance before. One came from her books, and the other from her toilette. The faces of both, however,were tolerably calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she had herselfincurred in this business, had given something more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of Kitty. As for Mary, she was mistress enough ofherself to whisper to Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table:</p>
<p>“This is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of. But we muststem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.”</p>
<p>“Unhappy as the event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson:</p>
<p>is beautiful; and that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply. Mary,however, continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.</p>
<p>In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were able to be for half-an-hour by themselves; andElizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to satisfy. After joining in generallamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain, and Miss Bennet could not assert to be wholly</p>
<p>“But tell me all and everything about it which I have not already heard. Give me</p>
<p>“Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality, especially onLydia's side, but nothing to give him any alarm. I am so grieved for him! His behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost. He <hi rend="i(1)">was coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had any idea of their not being gone to Scotland: when that apprehension</p>
<p>“And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not marry? Did he know of their intending</p>
<p>“Yes; but, when questioned by him Denny denied knowing anythingof their plans, and would not give his real opinion about it. He did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying &#8212; and from <hi</p>
<p>“How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a littleuneasy &#8212; a little fearful of my sister's happiness with him in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always quite right. Myfather and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowingmore than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their being in love witheach other, many weeks.”</p>
<p>“But not before they went to Brighton?”</p>
<p>“And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does he know his</p>
<p>“I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly did. He</p>
<p>“Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him, this could not</p>
<p>“Perhaps it would have been better,”</p>
<p>“But to expose the former faults of any person without knowing what their presentfeelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions.”</p>
<p>“Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his wife?”</p>
<p>“He brought it with him for us to see.”</p>
<p>Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These were the contents:</p>
<p>“You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help laughing myselfat your surprise to-morrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall think you asimpleton, for there is but one man in the world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to beoff. You need not send them word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater, when I write tothem and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for notkeeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-night. Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will dance with himat the next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I wish you would tell Sally to mend agreat slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our good</p>
<p>cried Elizabeth when she had finished it."What a letter is this, to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows, thatshe was serious on the subject of their journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a <hirend="i(1)">scheme of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!”</p>
<p>“I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten minutes. Mymother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!”</p>
<p>“was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story before the end</p>
<p>“I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult.My mother was in hysterics, and though I endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much as I might havedone! But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties.”</p>
<p>“Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look well. Oh that Ihad been with you! you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone.”</p>
<p>“Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, I am</p>
<p>be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. Shewas of great use and comfort to us all. And Lady Lucas has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to condole with us, and offered</p>
<p>“perhaps she meant well, but, under such a misfortune as this,</p>
<p>into the measures which herfather had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.</p>
<p>"to go to Epsom, the place where they last changed horses, see the postilions and tryif anything could be made out from them. His principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from ’ Clapham.It had come with a fare from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady's removing from one carriage into anothermight be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, hedetermined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not know of any otherdesigns that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding out</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 48</head>
<p>The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the nextmorning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent anddilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to send;but even of that they would have been glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.</p>
<p>When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going</p>
<p>who considered it</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the formerthought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in theirhours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as</p>
<p>with the design of cheering</p>
<p>&#8212; though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham'sextravagance or irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them.</p>
<p>All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an</p>
<p>He was declared</p>
<p>tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family.</p>
<p>he was the wickedestyoung man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness.Elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make herformer assurance of her sister's ruin still more certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially asthe time was now come when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely despaired of, they must in all probability havegained some news of them.</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a letter from him;</p>
<p>and Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and</p>
<p>he was now determined toinquire at all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming toLondon, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure, but as his brother was eager in it, he</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet seemed whollydisinclined at present to leave London and promised to write again very soon.There was also a postscript to this effect:</p>
<p>“I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from someof the young man's intimates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of thetown he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone, that one could apply to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be ofessential consequence. At present we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on thishead. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living, better than any other person.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her authority proceeded;but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved.</p>
<p>having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions</p>
<p>and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to lookforward to.</p>
<p>Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each was when thepost was expected. The arrival of letters was the first grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters, whatever of good or bad wasto be told would be communicated, and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.</p>
<p>different quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence, she accordingly read;and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:</p>
<p>condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire.Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with you and all your respectable family in your present distress,which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my part that</p>
<p>parent's mind. The death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there</p>
<p>degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her owndisposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you aregrievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daughter, to whom Ihave related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the</p>
<p>for who,</p>
<p>will connect themselveswith such a family?And this consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with augmentedsatisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Letme then advise you, my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, andleave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offense.</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he</p>
<p>It was not known that Wickhamhad a single relationship with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former acquaintances had beennumerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one,therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful</p>
<p>would be necessary to clear his expenses at Brighton.He owed a good deal in thetown, but his debts of honour were still more formidable.</p>
<p>them with horror.</p>
<p>“This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it.”</p>
<p>their father at home on the following day,which was Saturday. Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he hadyielded to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to beadvisable for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected,considering what her anxiety for his life had been before.</p>
<p>“What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?”</p>
<p>“Sure he will not leave London before he has found them. Who is to fightWickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?”</p>
<p>As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and the children should go</p>
<p>Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend that hadattended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectationwhich Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since her return</p>
<p>The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for the lowness of her spirits</p>
<p>who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings,was perfectly aware that,had she known nothing ofDarcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia's infamy somewhat better.It would have spared</p>
<p>two.</p>
<p>as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away, and it was some time before his</p>
<p>It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured tointroduce the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied,</p>
<p>“Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing, and I</p>
<p>“You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to fall into it!No, Lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression. It will pass away</p>
<p>“Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?”</p>
<p>“And Lydia used to want to go to London,”</p>
<p>“and her residence there will probably be of some duration.”</p>
<p>“Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May,which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.”</p>
<p>They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother's tea.</p>
<p>“which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune! Another day I will dothe same; I will sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kittyruns away.”</p>
<p>“I am not going to run away, papa,”</p>
<p>“If I should ever go to Brighton, I would behave better than</p>
<p>“You go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it asEastbourne, for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have at last learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enterinto my house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters. And</p>
<p>Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.</p>
<p>“Well, well,”</p>
<p>“do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I willtake you to a review at the end of them.”</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 49</head>
<p>Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walkingtogether in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that she came to call them to theirmother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons, when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet,</p>
<p>“I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might havegot some good news from town, so I took the liberty of coming to ask.”</p>
<p>“What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town.”</p>
<p>“don't you know there is an express come for master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been</p>
<p>Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They ran through the vestibuleinto the breakfast-room; from thence to the library; their father was in neither; and they were on the point of seeking him upstairs with theirmother, when they were met by the butler, who said:</p>
<p>“If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards the little copse.”</p>
<p>Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more, and ran across the lawnafter their father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.</p>
<p>Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind,while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out:</p>
<p>“Oh, papa, what news &#8212; what news? Have you heard from my uncle?”</p>
<p>“Well, and what news does it bring &#8212; good or bad?”</p>
<p>“But perhaps you would like to read it.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up.</p>
<p>“for I hardly know myself what it is about.”</p>
<p>whole, I hope it will give you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what part of Londonthey were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen them both &#8212;”</p>
<p>“Then it is as I always hoped,”</p>
<p>“I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there was anyintention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be</p>
<p>secured among your children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, duringyour life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which, considering everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far asI thought myself privileged, for you. I shall send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easilycomprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be. The world hasbeen deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on myniece, in addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole ofthis business, I will immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion foryour coming to town again; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your answer as fast as you can,and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, of which I hope you will approve.She comes to us to-day. I shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,</p>
<p>“Edw. Gardiner.”</p>
<p>cried Elizabeth, when she had finished.“Can it be possible that he will marry her?”</p>
<p>“Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought him,”</p>
<p>“And have you answered the letter?”</p>
<p>he wrote.</p>
<p>“come back and write immediately. Consider how important every moment is in such a</p>
<p>“Let me write for you,”</p>
<p>And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.</p>
<p>“but the terms, I suppose, must be complied with.”</p>
<p>“Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little.”</p>
<p>“Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there are twothings that I want very much to know; one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how am I ever to pay</p>
<p>“what do you mean, sir?”</p>
<p>“I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a temptation as one</p>
<p>“Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I</p>
<p>“Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be repaid?”</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reachedthe house. Their father then went on to the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-room.</p>
<p>cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves.“How strange this is! And for this we are to be thankful. Thatthey should marry, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!”</p>
<p>“I comfort myself with thinking,”</p>
<p>“that he certainly would not marry Lydia if he had not a real regard for her. Thoughour kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He haschildren of his own, and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?”</p>
<p>“If he were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been,”</p>
<p>“and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Mr.Gardiner has done for them, because Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited. Their taking her</p>
<p>acknowledge. By this time she is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy! What ameeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!”</p>
<p>“I hope and trust they will yet be happy. His consenting to marry her is a proof, Iwill believe, that he is come to a right way of thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself they will settle so</p>
<p>It now occurred to the girls thattheir mother wasin all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened.They went to the library, therefore, and</p>
<p>whether he would notwish them to make it known to her.He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly replied:</p>
<p>“May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?”</p>
<p>“Take whatever you like, and get away.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went upstairs together. Mary and Kittywere both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud.</p>
<p>following sentence added to its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from delight, as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and</p>
<p>To know thather daughter would be marriedwas enough.She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her</p>
<p>“This is delightful indeed! She will be married! I shall see her again!She will be married at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would manage everything! How I long to see her! and tosee dear Wickham too! But the clothes, the wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down toyour father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will put on my things in amoment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when we meet!”</p>
<p>obligations which Mr. Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under.</p>
<p>“For we must attribute this happy conclusion,”</p>
<p>assist Mr. Wickham with money.”</p>
<p>“it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If he had nothad a family of his own, I and my children must have had all his money you know; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him,except a few presents. Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well it sounds! And she was onlysixteen last June. My dear Jane, I am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settlewith your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.”</p>
<p>She was then proceeding</p>
<p>and would shortly have dictated</p>
<p>had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded herto wait till her father was</p>
<p>would be of small</p>
<p>and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too, came into</p>
<p>“I will go to Meryton,”</p>
<p>“as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sisterPhilips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage. An airing would do me a great deal ofgood, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is goingto be married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.”</p>
<p>refuge in her own room, thatshe might think with</p>
<p>must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful.</p>
<p>forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, onlytwo hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 50</head>
<p>Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life that,instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived him.He now wished it more than ever.</p>
<p>respect, Lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her.</p>
<p>prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be her husband might then have rested in its proper place.</p>
<p>He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone, should be forwarded atthe sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the</p>
<p>When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly useless, for, of course,they were to have a son. The son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow and younger children wouldby that means be provided for. Five daughters successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many years afterLydia's birth, had been certain that he would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no</p>
<p>Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and the children. But inwhat proportions it should be divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents. This was one point, with regard to Lydia, at least,which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgmentfor the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect approbation of all that was done, and hiswillingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him.</p>
<p>that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement.He would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and thecontinual presents in money which passed to her through her mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within that sum.</p>
<p>That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcomesurprise; for his chief wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first transports of rage which hadproduced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence. His letter was soon dispatched; for, thoughdilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his brother, butwas too angry with Lydia to send any message to her.</p>
<p>The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through theneighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of conversation had MissLydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant farmhouse. But there was much tobe talked of in marrying her; and the good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies inMeryton lost but a little of their spirit in this change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery was considered certain.</p>
<p>It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on this happy day she again took</p>
<p>which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ranwholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants. She was busily searching through the neighbourhood fora proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing or considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and</p>
<p>the drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for Purvis Lodge, the attics are</p>
<p>Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained. But when theyhad withdrawn, he said to her:</p>
<p>let us come to a right understanding. Into one house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance. I will not</p>
<p>A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm. It soon led to another; andMrs. Bennet found, with amazement and horror, thather husband would not advance</p>
<p>mark of affection whatever on the occasion.</p>
<p>inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that she couldbelieve possible. She was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any sense ofshame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they took place.</p>
<p>Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led tomake Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement,they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot.</p>
<p>She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were few people on whosesecrecy she would have more confidently depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister's frailty would havemortified her so much &#8212; not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself,</p>
<p>seemed a gulf impassable between them. Had Lydia's marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that Mr. Darcywould connect himself with a family where, to every other objection would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a manwhom he so justly scorned.</p>
<p>From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink.The wish of procuring her</p>
<p>which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derbyshire,</p>
<p>expectation survive such a blow as this.She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what. She becamejealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance ofgaining intelligence. She was convinced that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should meet.</p>
<p>could he know that theproposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago, would now have been most gladly and gratefully received! He was as generous, shedoubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal, there must be a triumph.</p>
<p>She began now to comprehend thathe was exactly the man who,in disposition and talents, would most suit her. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes. It was</p>
<p>from his judgement, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance.</p>
<p>could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was. An union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of theother, was soon to be formed in their family.</p>
<p>How Wickham and Lydia were</p>
<p>But how little of permanenthappiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions were stronger than their virtue,</p>
<p>Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's acknowledgmentshe briefly replied, with</p>
<p>promote the welfare of any of his family;and concluded with</p>
<p>might never be mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved on quitting the</p>
<p>“It was greatly my wish that he should do so,”</p>
<p>“as soon as his marriage was fixed on. And I think you will agree with me, in</p>
<p>regulars; and among his former friends, there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the promise of anensigncy in General &#8212;&#8212;'s regiment, now quartered in the North. It is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom.He promises fairly; and I hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. Ihave written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of Mr.Wickham in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble ofcarrying similar assurances to his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his information? He has given in all hisdebts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will be completed in a week. They will then join his</p>
<p>before she leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother. &#8212; Yours, etc.</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal from the&#8212;&#8212;shire as clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the North, justwhen she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a</p>
<p>besides, it was such a pitythat Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites.</p>
<p>“it will be quite shocking to send her away! And there are several of</p>
<p>before she set off for the North, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their</p>
<p>mildly, to receive her and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act asthey wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she would be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood before shewas banished to the North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled,that as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such ascheme, and had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 51</head>
<p>Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for herprobably more than she felt for herself. The carriage was sent to meet them at &#8212;&#8212;, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Theirarrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had <hirend="i(1)">she been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure.</p>
<p>They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive them. Smiles decked the</p>
<p>Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room.Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile to Wickham, who followed hislady; and wished them both joy with an alacrity which shewed no doubt of their happiness.</p>
<p>Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. Hiscountenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provokehim. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turnedfrom sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of somelittle alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there.</p>
<p>Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners were always so pleasing,that had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, wouldhave delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down,resolving within herselfto draw no limits in</p>
<p>She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their</p>
<p>There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough;and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a good humoured easewhich she felt</p>
<p>to have the happiest memories in the world.Nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which hersisters would not have alluded to for the world.</p>
<p>“since I went away; it seems but a fortnight I declare; and yet there have beenthings enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! thoughI thought it would be very good fun if I was.”</p>
<p>Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; butshe, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued,</p>
<p>“Oh! mamma, do the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid theymight not; and we overtook William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side-glass next to him,and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything.”</p>
<p>she heard them passing through the hall to the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her</p>
<p>“Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a marriedwoman.”</p>
<p>It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had beenso wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and tohear herself called “Mrs. Wickham” by each of them; and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her ring, and boast of being married, toMrs. Hill and the two housemaids.</p>
<p>said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast room,“and what do you think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters</p>
<p>mamma, we did not all go.”</p>
<p>“Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don'tat all like your going such a way off. Must it be so?”</p>
<p>and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us. We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some balls, and I will</p>
<p>“And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and Idare say I shall get husbands for them before the winter is over."</p>
<p>“but I do not particularly like your way of getting husbands.”</p>
<p>Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham had received hiscommission before he left London, and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight.</p>
<p>No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of thetime by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circlewas even more desirable to such as did think, than such as did not.</p>
<p>was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it;</p>
<p>and she would have wondered why,without violently caringfor her, he chose to elope with her at all,</p>
<p>his flight was renderednecessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion.</p>
<p>Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was</p>
<p>no one was to be put incompetition with him. He did every thing best in the world;and she was surehe would kill more birds on</p>
<p>One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said</p>
<p>“Lizzy, I never gave you an account of my wedding, I believe.You were not by, when I told mamma and the others all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?”</p>
<p>“La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were married, youknow, at St. Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should all be there by eleven o'clock. My uncleand aunt and I were to go together; and the others were to meet us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was soafraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time Iwas dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was thinking,you may suppose, of my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat."</p>
<p>"Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never be over; for,by the bye, you are to understand, that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll believe me, I did notonce put my foot out of doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was rather thin, but,however, the Little Theatre was open. Well, and so just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horridman Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for myuncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes' time,and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he had been prevented going, the wedding need not be putoff, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well.”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes! &#8212; he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious me! Iquite forgot! I ought not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be such a secret!”</p>
<p>“If it was to be secret,”</p>
<p>“say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my seeking no further.”</p>
<p>said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity;“we will ask you no questions.”</p>
<p>“for if you did, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be angry.”</p>
<p>On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by runningaway.</p>
<p>such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information.</p>
<p>sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she wassatisfied with none. Those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable.</p>
<p>could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her</p>
<p>what Lydia had dropt, ifit were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.</p>
<p>“what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and(comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it&#8212; unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must endeavour to besatisfied with ignorance.”</p>
<p>Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of whatLydia had let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it &#8212;till it appeared whetherher inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 52</head>
<p>Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter assoon as she possibly could. She was no sooner in possession of it than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to beinterrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a</p>
<p>“I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning toanswering it, as I foresee that alittle writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myselfsurprised by your application; I did not expect it from you. Don't think me angry, however, for I only mean to let youknow that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgivemy impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am &#8212; and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed</p>
<p>Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr. Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all over before Iarrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as yours seems to have been.</p>
<p>where your sister and Mr. Wickham were,</p>
<p>talked with them both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once.From what I can collect,</p>
<p>only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them.The motive professed was his conviction ofits being owing tohimself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide</p>
<p>the whole to his</p>
<p>it beneath him to lay his private actions open to the world.His character was to</p>
<p>forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself.If he had another motive, I am sure it would never</p>
<p>in town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than we had; andthe consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us. "There is a lady,</p>
<p>a Mrs. Younge, whowas some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation,though he did not say what.</p>
<p>house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs. Younge was,he knew,</p>
<p>with Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him as soon as he got to town. But it was two or three days before he could get from herwhat he wanted. She would not betray her trust,</p>
<p>without bribery andcorruption, for she really did know where her friend was to to be found. Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in London, andhad she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their abode with her.At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished-for direction.They were in&#8212;&#8212;street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her,he acknowledged,</p>
<p>assistance, as far as it would go. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was.</p>
<p>none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should be married some time or other,and it did not much signify when.Since such were her feelings, it only remained,</p>
<p>to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with</p>
<p>obliged to leave the regiment, on account of some debts of honour, which were very pressing;and scrupled not to lay all the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on her own</p>
<p>resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He must go somewhere, but he didnot know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on.</p>
<p>why he had notmarried your sister at once. Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his</p>
<p>cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in some other country. Under such circumstances, however, he was notlikely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief. "They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of coursewanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. "Every thing being settled between them, Mr.Darcy's next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mr.</p>
<p>your father was stillwith him, but would quit town the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle,</p>
<p>He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that agentleman had called on business. "On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they had agreat deal of talk together. "They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all settled before Monday: assoon as it was, the express was sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defectof his character, after all. He has been accused of many faults at different times, but this is the true one. Nothing was</p>
<p>would most readily have settled the whole. "They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or ladyconcerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced toput up with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning gave himgreat pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due. But,Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most. "You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young people. Hisdebts are to be paid, amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own settled uponher, and his commission purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as I have given</p>
<p>It was owing to him,to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had beenreceived and noticed as he was.Perhaps there was some truth in this; though I doubtwhether his reserve, or anybody's  reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of allthis fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit foranother interest in the affair. "When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were stillstaying at Pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in London once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then toreceive the last finish. "I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; I hopeat least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant admission to the house. Hewas exactly what he had been, when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied with <hi rend="i(1)">her behaviour while she staid with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home wasexactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to her repeatedly in the most seriousmanner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me,it was by good luck, for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, andfor their sakes had patience with her. "Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding. He dined withus the next day, and was to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take thisopportunity of saying (what I was never bold enough to say before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us has, in every respect, been aspleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and <hirend="i(1)">that, if he marry prudently, his wife may teach him. I thought him very sly &#8212; he hardly ever</p>
<p>exclude me from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice little pair of ponies, wouldbe the very thing. "But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half hour. Yours, very sincerely,</p>
<p>The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficultto determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share.The vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced ofwhat Mr. Darcy might havebeen doing to forward her sister's match,which she had feared to encourage</p>
<p>obligation, were proved beyond their greatest extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the troubleand mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and wherehe was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose veryname it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem.Her heart did whisper that</p>
<p>But it was a hope shortly checked by other considerations, and</p>
<p>even her vanity wasinsufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her &#8212; for a woman who had already refused him &#8212; as able to overcome asentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham.Brother-in-law of Wickham!</p>
<p>much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief. It wasreasonable that he should feel he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and though she would not place herself</p>
<p>her, might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned. It was painful, exceedingly painful, to knowthat they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to</p>
<p>Oh! how heartily did shegrieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him.For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him.</p>
<p>She read over her aunt's commendation of him again and again. It was hardly enough; but itpleased her. She was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had beenpersuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.</p>
<p>She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's approach; and before she couldstrike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham.</p>
<p>she replied with a smile;“but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.”</p>
<p>“I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always goodfriends; and now we are better.”</p>
<p>“I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton. And so,</p>
<p>“I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, orelse I could take it in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond of me. But of</p>
<p>“And what did she say?”</p>
<p>you were gone into the</p>
<p>she was afraid</p>
<p>out well.At such a distance as that, you know, things are strangely</p>
<p>he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards said:</p>
<p>“I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other several times.I wonder what he can be doing there.”</p>
<p>“Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh,”</p>
<p>“Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I understood from</p>
<p>improved within this year or two.When I last saw her, she was not very promising. I am very glad you liked her. I hopeshe will turn out well.”</p>
<p>“I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.”</p>
<p>“I do not recollect that we did.”</p>
<p>“I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightfulplace! &#8212; Excellent Parsonage House! It would have suited me in every respect.”</p>
<p>“How should you have liked making sermons?”</p>
<p>“Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertionwould soon have been nothing. One ought not to repine &#8212; but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The quiet, the retirementof such a life would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when youwere in Kent?”</p>
<p>from authority, which I thought as good,</p>
<p>it was left youconditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.”</p>
<p>“You have. Yes, there was something in that; I told you so from</p>
<p>there was a time, whensermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present;</p>
<p>“You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember what I told youon that point, when first we talked of it.”</p>
<p>They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; andunwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:</p>
<p>“Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us quarrel aboutthe past. In future, I hope we shall be always of one mind.”</p>
<p>She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though he hardly knew how to</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 53</head>
<p>Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he</p>
<p>she was pleased to find that</p>
<p>The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was forced to submit to aseparation, which, as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to Newcastle, was likely to continue at least atwelvemonth.</p>
<p>“when shall we meet again?”</p>
<p>“Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps.”</p>
<p>“As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for writing. Mysisters may write to me. They will have nothing else to do.”</p>
<p>Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife's. He smiled, looked handsome,</p>
<p>“He is as fine a fellow,”said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of the house, "as ever I saw.</p>
<p>defy even Sir William Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law.”</p>
<p>“that there is nothing so bad as parting with one's friends. One seemsso forlorn without them.”</p>
<p>but only because her husband's regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.”</p>
<p>But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly relieved, and her mindopened again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper at Netherfield had receivedorders to prepare for the arrival of her master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in</p>
<p>“Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister,”(for Mrs. Phillips first brought her the news).</p>
<p>nothing to us, you know, and I am sure  I never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come toNetherfield, if he likes it. And who knows what may happen? But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed long agonever to mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?”</p>
<p>“for Mrs. Nicholls was in Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, and went outmyself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certain true. He comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely onWednesday. She was going to the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some more meat on Wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks</p>
<p>of his coming without changing colour. It was many months since she had mentioned his name toElizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said:</p>
<p>“I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; andI know I appeared distressed. But don't imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I felt that I <hirend="i(1)">should be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing,that he comes alone; because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am afraid of myself, but I dread other people's</p>
<p>Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in Derbyshire,</p>
<p>with no other view than what was acknowledged;</p>
<p>and she wavered as to</p>
<p>his coming there with his friend's permission, or being bold enough to come without it.</p>
<p>“that this poor man cannot come to a house which he has legally hired, withoutraising all this speculation! I will leave him to himself.”</p>
<p>In spite of what her sister</p>
<p>her spirits were affected</p>
<p>They were more disturbed,</p>
<p>The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents, about a twelvemonth ago,was now brought forward again.</p>
<p>“you will wait on him of course.”</p>
<p>“No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I went to seehim, he should marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again.”</p>
<p>His wife represented to himhow absolutely necessarysuch an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to Netherfield.</p>
<p>"If he wants our society, let him seek it. He knows where we live. I will not spendmy hours in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back again.”</p>
<p>“Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not waiton him. But, however, that shan't prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That willmake thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him.”</p>
<p>Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her husband's incivility;though it was very mortifyingto know that her neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it, before they did.As the day of his arrival drew near,</p>
<p>“It would be nothing; I could see him with perfect indifference, but I can hardlybear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she says.Happy shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!”</p>
<p>“I wish I could say anything to comfort you,”</p>
<p>“but it is wholly out of my power. You must feel it; and the usual satisfaction ofpreaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have always so much.”</p>
<p>saw him, from her dressing-room window, enter the paddock and ride towards the house.</p>
<p>Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely kept her place at thetable; but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window &#8212; she looked &#8212; she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down again by her</p>
<p>“There is a gentleman with him, mamma,”</p>
<p>“who can it be?”</p>
<p>know.”</p>
<p>“it looks just like that man that used to be with him before. Mr. what's-his-name.</p>
<p>“Good gracious! Mr. Darcy! &#8212; and so it does, I vow. Well, anyfriend of Mr. Bingley's will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him.”</p>
<p>Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern.</p>
<p>knew but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and therefore</p>
<p>the awkwardness which must</p>
<p>Both sisters were uncomfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves;</p>
<p>without being heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could notbe suspected by Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs. Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards</p>
<p>a man whose proposals she had refused, and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the person to whomthe whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least asreasonable and just as what Jane felt for Bingley.</p>
<p>was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in</p>
<p>The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a minute with an additionalglow, and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes,</p>
<p>his affection and wishesmust still be unshaken. But she would not be secure.</p>
<p>“Let me first see how he behaves,”</p>
<p>“it will then be early enough for expectation.”</p>
<p>She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, tillanxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler than usual, but moresedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen's appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a</p>
<p>Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, withan eagerness which it did not often command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious, as usual; and,</p>
<p>look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother's presence be what he was before her uncle</p>
<p>It was a painful, but not</p>
<p>Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking bothpleased and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed, especially when contrastedwith the cold and ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address to his friend.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, particularly, who knew thather mother owed to the</p>
<p>was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied.</p>
<p>how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner</p>
<p>a question which she could not answer without confusion, said scarcely anything.He was not seated by her;perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends, when he could not to</p>
<p>But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally,</p>
<p>on no object but the ground. More thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She wasdisappointed, and angry with herself for being so.</p>
<p>“Could I expect it to be otherwise!”</p>
<p>“Yet why did he come?”</p>
<p>She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to him she had hardly courage</p>
<p>“It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away,”</p>
<p>“I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People <hirend="i(1)">did say you meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes havehappened in the neighbourhood, since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my own daughters. I suppose you have heard ofit; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in The Times and The Courier, I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It wasonly said, ‘Lately, George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,’ without there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived,or anything. It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?”</p>
<p>and made his congratulations. Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How Mr. Darcy looked,</p>
<p>“It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married,”continued her mother, “but at the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone down to Newcastle, aplace quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay I do not know how long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his</p>
<p>Elizabeth, who knew</p>
<p>was in such misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however, theexertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and</p>
<p>whether he meant to make any</p>
<p>A few weeks,</p>
<p>“When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley,”</p>
<p>“I beg you will come here, and shoot as many as you please on Mr.Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and will save all the best of the covies for you.”</p>
<p>she was persuaded,would be hastening to the</p>
<p>“The first wish of my heart,”</p>
<p>“is never more to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford nopleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see either one or the other again!”</p>
<p>Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soonafterwards material relief,</p>
<p>how much the beauty of her</p>
<p>Jane was anxious that</p>
<p>and was really persuaded that</p>
<p>But her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent.</p>
<p>When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her intended civility, andthey were invited and engaged</p>
<p>few days time.</p>
<p>“for when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a familydinner with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and I assure you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and</p>
<p>They then went away.</p>
<p>she always kept a very good table,</p>
<p>anything less than two</p>
<p>on whom she had such anxious designs,</p>
<p>and pride of one who had ten thousand a year.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 54</head>
<p>As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; orin other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.</p>
<p>She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.</p>
<p>“He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he was intown; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will think no more</p>
<p>Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joinedher with a cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.</p>
<p>“Now,”</p>
<p>“that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, andI shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet</p>
<p>“My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?”</p>
<p>“I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with you as</p>
<p>They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was givingway to all the happy schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had revived.</p>
<p>On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two who were most anxiouslyexpected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerlywatched to see whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother,</p>
<p>and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble</p>
<p>she would have imagined that</p>
<p>his eyes likewise turnedtowards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm.</p>
<p>His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an admiration of her, which,</p>
<p>if left wholly to himself,Jane's happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured.</p>
<p>behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her asthe table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother.She knewhow little such asituation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage.She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoketo each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him more</p>
<p>she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to</p>
<p>was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.</p>
<p>She was in hopes thatthe evening would afford</p>
<p>the whole of the visitwould not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his</p>
<p>Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, waswearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure</p>
<p>he looked as if he wouldhave answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table,where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close aconfederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of the girls movedcloser to her than ever, and said, in a whisper:</p>
<p>“The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them; do we?”</p>
<p>Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, enviedeveryone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for being so silly!</p>
<p>“A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to expect arenewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? There is no</p>
<p>She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee cup himself; and she seized</p>
<p>“Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.”</p>
<p>“Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough, these threeweeks.”</p>
<p>She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might havebetter success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering to Elizabeth again, he walkedaway.</p>
<p>When the tea-things were removed, and the card-tables placed, the ladies all rose, andElizabeth was</p>
<p>when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her mother's rapacity forwhist players, and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined forthe evening at different tables, and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; buttheir carriage was</p>
<p>said she, as soon as they were left to themselves,</p>
<p>well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn &#8212; and everybody said they never sawso fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases' last week; and evenMr. Darcy acknowledged, thatthe partridges wereremarkably well done;and I suppose he has two or three French cooks at least. And, my dearJane, I never saw you look in greater beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what do you think she said</p>
<p>'Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we</p>
<p>in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane,</p>
<p>she would get him at</p>
<p>and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyondreason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.</p>
<p>“The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may</p>
<p>that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectlysatisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with greatersweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.”</p>
<p>“you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.”</p>
<p>“How hard it is in some cases to be believed!"</p>
<p>"And how impossible in others!”</p>
<p>“But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I acknowledge?”</p>
<p>“That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to instruct,though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 55</head>
<p>A few days after this visit, Mr. Bingley called again, and alone. Hisfriend had left him that morning for London, but was to return home in ten days time. He sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably goodspirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concern,</p>
<p>engaged elsewhere.</p>
<p>“I hope we shall be more lucky.”</p>
<p>happy at any time, etc. etc.; and if she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.</p>
<p>“Can you come to-morrow?”</p>
<p>all for to-morrow;and her invitation was accepted with alacrity.</p>
<p>He came, and in such very good time that the ladies were none of them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennetto her daughter's room, in her dressing gown, and with her hair half finished, crying out:</p>
<p>“My dear Jane, make haste and hurry down. He is come &#8212; Mr. Bingleyis come. He is, indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here, Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown. Never mind Miss</p>
<p>“We will be down as soon as we can,”</p>
<p>“but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went up stairs half an</p>
<p>“Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come be quick, be quick!</p>
<p>But when her mother was gone,Jane would not be prevailed onto go down without one of</p>
<p>The same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennetretired to the library, as was his custom, and Mary went up stairs to her instrument.Two obstacles of the five</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet sat looking and winking at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time, withoutmaking any impression on them. Elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she very innocently said,</p>
<p>“What is the matter mamma? What do you keep winking at me for? What am I to do?”</p>
<p>“Nothing child, nothing. I did not wink at you.”She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she</p>
<p>“Come here, my love, I want to speak to you,”</p>
<p>took her out of the room. Jane instantly gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at</p>
<p>she would not give in to it.In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half-opened the door and called out:</p>
<p>“Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with you.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was forced to go.</p>
<p>“We may as well leave them by themselves you know;”said her mother, as soon as she was in the hall.</p>
<p>Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall, till sheand Kitty were out of sight, then returned into the drawing-room.</p>
<p>Mrs. Bennet's schemes for this day were ineffectual.Bingley was every thingthat was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter.</p>
<p>bore with the ill-judged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly</p>
<p>He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away, an engagement wasformed, chiefly through his own and Mrs. Bennet's means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.</p>
<p>After this day, Jane said no more of her indifference. Not a word passed between the sisters</p>
<p>but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that</p>
<p>concluded, unless Mr. Darcy returned within the stated time.Seriously, however, she felt tolerably persuaded that</p>
<p>place with that gentleman's concurrence.</p>
<p>Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and Mr. Bennet spent the morning together, ashad been agreed on. The latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected. There was nothing of presumption or folly in Bingley thatcould provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen him.Bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Bennet's invention was again at work to get every body away from him andher daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfast room for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all goingto sit down to cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother's schemes.</p>
<p>But on returning to the drawing-room, when her letter was finished,she saw, to her infinite surprise,there was reason to fear</p>
<p>if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from eachother, would have told it all.</p>
<p>Their situation was awkward enough; but hers</p>
<p>was still worse.Not a syllable was uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on the point of going away again, whenBingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.</p>
<p>could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and instantly</p>
<p>acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, thatshe was the happiestcreature in the world.</p>
<p>“by far too much. I do not deserve it. Oh! why is not everybody as happy?"</p>
<p>Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words couldbut poorly express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to Jane. But she would not allow herself to stay with her sister,</p>
<p>“I would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude; or allow her tohear it from anyone but myself. He is gone to my father already. Oh! Lizzy, to know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure to all mydear family! how shall I bear so much happiness!”</p>
<p>She then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the card party, and wassitting up stairs with Kitty.</p>
<p>Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled atthe rapidity and ease withwhich an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation.</p>
<p>and contrivance! the happiest, wisest, most reasonable end!”</p>
<p>In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose conference with her father had been short and</p>
<p>“With my mother up stairs. She will be down in a moment, I dare say.”</p>
<p>the good wishes and</p>
<p>They shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of</p>
<p>similarity of feeling and taste between her and himself.</p>
<p>It was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of Miss Bennet's mind gavea glow of such sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon.Mrs. Bennet could not give her consent or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked to Bingley ofnothing else for half an hour; and when Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was.</p>
<p>Not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave forthe night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter, and said:</p>
<p>“Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy woman.”</p>
<p>Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.</p>
<p>"and I have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I have not adoubt of your doing very well together. Your tempers are by no means unlike. You are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolvedon; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always exceed your income.”</p>
<p>“I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable</p>
<p>cried his wife,“what are you talking of? Why, he has four or five thousand a year, and</p>
<p>“Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I am so happy! I am sure I shan't get a wink ofsleep all night. I knew how it would be. I always said it must be so, at last. I was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing! I remember,as soon as ever I saw him, when he first came into Hertfordshire last year, I thought how likely it was that you should come together. Oh! he isthe handsomest young man that ever was seen!”</p>
<p>Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was beyond competition her favourite child. At thatmoment, she cared for no other. Her younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness which she might in future be</p>
<p>Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Netherfield; and Kitty begged very hard for a fewballs there every winter.</p>
<p>Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at Longbourn; coming frequently beforebreakfast, and always remaining till after supper;unless when some barbarousneighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner which he thought himself obliged to accept.</p>
<p>Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for while he was present,Jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else; but she found herself considerably useful to both of them in those hours of separation that mustsometimes occur. In the absence of Jane, he always attached himself to Elizabeth, for the pleasure of talking of her; and when Bingley was gone,</p>
<p>“by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring! I had</p>
<p>“But how did he account for it?”</p>
<p>“It must have been his sister's doing. They were certainly no friends to hisacquaintance with me, which I cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects. But when they see, as Itrust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again; though we can never bewhat we once were to each other.”</p>
<p>“that I ever heard you utter. Good girl! It would vex me, indeed, to see you again</p>
<p>“Would you believe it, Lizzy, that when he went to town last November, he reallyloved me, and nothing but a persuasion of my being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again!”</p>
<p>little value he put on his own good qualities.</p>
<p>Elizabeth was pleased to find that</p>
<p>interference of his friend, for, though Jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world,she knewit was a circumstancewhich must prejudice her against him.</p>
<p>“Oh! Lizzy, why am I thus singled from my family, and blessed above them all! If Icould but see you as happy! If there were but such another man for you!”</p>
<p>“If you were to give me forty such men, I never could be so happy as you. Till I have</p>
<p>meet with another Mr. Collins in time.”</p>
<p>The situation of affairs in the Longbourn family could not be long a secret. Mrs. Bennet wasprivileged to whisper it to Mrs. Phillips, and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her neighbours in</p>
<p>The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be</p>
<p>the world,though only a few weeks before, when Lydia had first run away,</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 56</head>
<p>One morning, about a week after Bingley's engagement with Jane had beenformed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by thesound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn. It was too early in the morning for visitors, and besides, theequipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours. The horses were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant whopreceded it, were familiar to them. As it was certain, however, that somebody was coming,</p>
<p>such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the shrubbery.They both set off, and the conjectures of the remaining three continued, though with littlesatisfaction, till the door was thrown open and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de Bourgh.</p>
<p>They were of course all intending to be surprised; but their astonishment was beyond theirexpectation; and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what Elizabeth felt.</p>
<p>She entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no other reply toElizabeth's salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother</p>
<p>her with the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in silence, she said very stiffly to Elizabeth,</p>
<p>“I hope you are well, Miss Bennet. That lady I suppose is your mother.”</p>
<p>she was.</p>
<p>and my eldest is somewhere about the grounds, walking with a young man, who, I believe, will soon become a part of the family."</p>
<p>windows are full west.”</p>
<p>“May I take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left Mr. andMrs. Collins well.”</p>
<p>“Yes, very well. I saw them the night before last.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed theonly probable motive for her calling. But no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.</p>
<p>with great civility,</p>
<p>“Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one sideof your lawn. I should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.”</p>
<p>“and show her ladyship about the different walks. I think she will bepleased with the hermitage.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth obeyed, and running into her own room for her parasol, attended her noble guestdownstairs. As they passed through the hall, Lady Catherine opened the doors into the dining-parlour and drawing-room, and</p>
<p>walked on.</p>
<p>Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth saw that her waiting-woman was in it. Theyproceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse; Elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who wasnow more than usually insolent and disagreeable.</p>
<p>“How could I everthink her like her nephew?”</p>
<p>As soon as they entered the copse, Lady Catherine began in the following manner:&#8212;</p>
<p>Your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why I come.”</p>
<p>Elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.</p>
<p>“you ought to know, that I am not to be trifled with. But however insincere <hi</p>
<p>and frankness, and in a cause of such moment as this, I shall certainly not depart from it. A report of a most alarming nature reached me two days</p>
<p>I was told thatnot only your sister was on</p>
<p>would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephew, my own nephew, Mr. Darcy.Though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I would not injurehim so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to</p>
<p>said Elizabeth, colouring with astonishment and disdain,“I wonder you took the trouble of coming so far. What could your ladyship propose by</p>
<p>“will be rather a confirmation of it; if, indeed, such a report is in existence.”</p>
<p>circulated by yourselves? Do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?”</p>
<p>“I never heard that it was.”</p>
<p>“And can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for</p>
<p>“I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship. You may askquestions which I shall not choose to answer.”</p>
<p>nephew, made you an offer of marriage?”</p>
<p>“It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason. But <hirend="i(1)">your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family.You may have drawn him in.”</p>
<p>“Miss Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not been accustomed to such language asthis. I am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.”</p>
<p>“But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour</p>
<p>“Let me be rightly understood. This match, to which you have the presumption toaspire, can never take place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is engaged to my daughter. Now what have you to say?”</p>
<p>“Only this; that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer</p>
<p>“The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind. From their infancy, they havebeen intended for each other. It was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of hers. While in their cradles, we plannedthe union: and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished in their marriage, to be prevented by a young woman ofinferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friends? To his tacitengagement with Miss de Bourgh? Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy? Have you not heard me say that from his earliest hours hewas destined for his cousin?”</p>
<p>“Yes, and I had heard it before. But what is that to me? If there is no otherobjection to my marrying your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry Miss de</p>
<p>inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice? And if I am that choice, why may not I accept him?”</p>
<p>interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all. You will be censured,slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.”</p>
<p>“But the wife of Mr. Darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happinessnecessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to repine.”</p>
<p>attentions to you last spring? Is nothing due to me on that score? Let us sit down. You are to understand, Miss Bennet, that I came here with thedetermined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it. I have not been used to submit to any person's whims. I have not</p>
<p>“That will make your ladyship's situation at present morepitiable; but it will have no effect on me.”</p>
<p>“I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed</p>
<p>member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune.Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you</p>
<p>“In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that sphere. He isa gentleman; I am a gentleman's daughter; so far we are equal.”</p>
<p>“True. You are a gentleman's daughter. But who was your mother?</p>
<p>“if your nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to <hi rend="i(1)"</p>
<p>Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this</p>
<p>“And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?”</p>
<p>“I will make no promise of the kind.”</p>
<p>woman. But do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the assurance I require.”</p>
<p>into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for promise maketheir marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would my refusing to accepthis hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported thisextraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can beworked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, I cannot tell;</p>
<p>already urged, I have still another to add. I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous elopement. I know it all; thatthe young man's marrying her was a patched-up business, at the expence of your father and uncles. And is such a girl to be mynephew's sister? Is her husband, is the son of his late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth! &#8212; ofwhat are you thinking? Are the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?"</p>
<p>“You can now have nothing further to say,”she resentfully answered.</p>
<p>And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned back. Her ladyship was</p>
<p>“You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Unfeeling, selfishgirl! Do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?”</p>
<p>“Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments.”</p>
<p>“I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, inmy own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to you, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.”</p>
<p>“It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty,honour, and gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world."</p>
<p>claim on me, in the present instance. No principle of either would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the resentment ofhis family, or the indignation of the world, if the former were excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moment'sconcern &#8212; and the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn.”</p>
<p>“And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall nowknow how to act. Do not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find you reasonable; but,depend upon it, I will carry my point.”</p>
<p>talked on, till they were at the door of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added,</p>
<p>Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into thehouse, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her</p>
<p>why Lady Catherine would</p>
<p>“she would go.”</p>
<p>“She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiouslycivil! for she only came, I suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing throughMeryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, Lizzy?”</p>
<p>Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance oftheir conversation was impossible.</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 57</head>
<p>The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth</p>
<p>appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr.</p>
<p>It was a rational scheme,</p>
<p>but from what the report of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to</p>
<p>his being the intimate friend of Bingley, and her  being the sister of Jane, was enough, at a time whenthe expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea.</p>
<p>Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had only setthat down as almost certain and immediate, which she had looked forward to as possible at some future</p>
<p>In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however,</p>
<p>From what she had said of her resolution to prevent their marriage,</p>
<p>application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with</p>
<p>she dared not pronounce. She knew not</p>
<p>it was natural to suppose that</p>
<p>her ladyship than she could do; and it was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with <hi rend="i(1)">one, whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his notions of dignity,he would probably feel that the arguments, which</p>
<p>had appeared weak and</p>
<p>If he had been waveringbefore as to what he should do, which had often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt, and</p>
<p>In that case he would</p>
<p>him in her way through town; and his engagement to Bingley of coming again to Netherfield must give way.</p>
<p>within a few days,”</p>
<p>“I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, everywish of his constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease to</p>
<p>The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great;but they obligingly satisfied it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much</p>
<p>The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her father, who came out of hislibrary with a letter in his hand.</p>
<p>“I was going to look for you; come into my room.”</p>
<p>She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened bythe supposition of its being in some manner connected with the letter he held.</p>
<p>and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations.</p>
<p>She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He then said,</p>
<p>principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the brink</p>
<p>The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being aletter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; andshe was undeterminedwhether most to be pleasedthat he explained himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself;when her father continued:</p>
<p>“From Mr. Collins! and what can he have to say?”</p>
<p>“Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with congratulations on theapproaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured, gossiping Lucases. I shall not sportwith your impatience, by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows:</p>
<p>this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughterElizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of her fate may</p>
<p>"Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?"'This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing the heart ofmortal can most desire &#8212; splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn mycousin Elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman's proposals, which, of course, you will</p>
<p>“Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:</p>
<p>“My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine that hisaunt, Lady Catherine de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.'</p>
<p>“Mr. Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I <hirend="i(1)">have surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases, have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name wouldhave given the lie more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never</p>
<p>smile. Never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.</p>
<p>immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on the score of some familyobjections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her consentto what she termed</p>
<p>noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.'</p>
<p>“I am truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up,and am only concerned that their living together before the marriage took place should be so generally known. I must not, however, neglect theduties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they weremarried. It was an encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously have opposed it. You ought certainlyto forgive them, as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.'</p>
<p>You are not going to be Missish, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make</p>
<p>“Yes &#8212; that is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed onany other man it would have been nothing; but his perfect indifference, and your pointed dislike, makeit so delightfully absurd! Much as I abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any consideration. Nay, when I read aletter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray,Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?”</p>
<p>To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without theleast suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they werenot. It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Mr. Darcy's</p>
<p>she could do nothing but wonder atsuch a want of</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 58</head>
<p>Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady Catherine'svisit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat inmomentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the habit ofwalking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstripthem. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much</p>
<p>was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and</p>
<p>They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw nooccasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone.Now was the moment for her</p>
<p>and, while her courage was high, she immediately said:</p>
<p>own feelings, care not how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister. Eversince I have known it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I shouldnot have merely my own gratitude to express.”</p>
<p>“that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given youuneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner was so little to be trusted.”</p>
<p>had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again, in the name ofall my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of</p>
<p>“If you will thank me,”</p>
<p>“let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to you might addforce to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But your family owe me nothing. Much as I</p>
<p>Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added,</p>
<p>“You are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they werelast April, tell me so at once. My affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on this subject</p>
<p>Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced</p>
<p>undergone so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present</p>
<p>The happiness which thisreply produced, was such as he had</p>
<p>as sensibly and as warmly as</p>
<p>Had Elizabeth been able to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the expression ofheartfelt delight, diffused over his face, became him; but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of feelings, which, inproving of what importance she was to him, made his affection every moment more valuable.</p>
<p>They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt,</p>
<p>they were indebted for theirpresent good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through London, and there relate herjourney to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latterwhich, in her ladyship's apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that such a relation must assist herendeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew which she had refused to give.But, unluckily for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.</p>
<p>“as I had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough of yourdisposition to be certain that, had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly</p>
<p>“Yes, you know enough of my frankness to believe me capable of</p>
<p>“What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your accusations wereill-founded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It was unpardonable. I cannot think ofit without abhorrence.”</p>
<p>“We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening,”</p>
<p>“The conduct of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but sincethen, we have both, I hope, improved in civility.”</p>
<p>“I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I then said, ofmy conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me. Your reproof, sowell applied, I shall never forget:</p>
<p>Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they havetortured me &#8212; though it was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow their justice."</p>
<p>“I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression. I hadnot the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a way.”</p>
<p>addressed you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me.”</p>
<p>“Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at all. I assure</p>
<p>what its effect on her hadbeen, and how gradually all her former prejudices had been removed.</p>
<p>“I knew,”</p>
<p>“that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was necessary. I hope you havedestroyed the letter. There was one part especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your having the power of reading again. I canremember some expressions which might justly make you hate me.”</p>
<p>of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily changed as that</p>
<p>“When I wrote that letter,”</p>
<p>“I believed myself perfectly calm and cool, but I am since convinced that it waswritten in a dreadful bitterness of spirit.”</p>
<p>charity itself. But think no more of the letter. The feelings of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so widely differentfrom what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You must learn some of my philosophy. Think only</p>
<p>retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, ofinnocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude which cannot, which ought not, to be repelled. Ihave been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a child I was taught what was  right, but Iwas not taught to correct my temper. I was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit. Unfortunately an only son, (formany years an only child) I was spoilt by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father, particularly, all that wasbenevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing; to care for none beyond my own family circle; tothink meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own.Such I was, from eight to eight and twenty; and such I might still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe you! Youtaught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you, I was properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception.You showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.”</p>
<p>“Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be wishing,</p>
<p>meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after that evening?”</p>
<p>“Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take a proper</p>
<p>“I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met at Pemberley. You</p>
<p>“was to show you, by every civility in my power, that I was not so mean as to resentthe past; and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soonany other wishes introduced themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I had seen you.”</p>
<p>acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to the cause of that interruption,</p>
<p>his resolution of following</p>
<p>thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend.</p>
<p>She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to each, to be dwelt on</p>
<p>After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, theyfound at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home.</p>
<p>was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their affairs.Darcy was delightedwith their engagement; his</p>
<p>“I must ask whether you were surprised?”</p>
<p>“Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen.”</p>
<p>“I made a confession to him, which I believe I ought to have made long ago. I toldhim of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had theslightest suspicion. I told him, moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him;and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.”</p>
<p>“Did you speak from your own observation,”</p>
<p>“when you told him that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last</p>
<p>“From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits which I hadlately made her here; and I was convinced of her affection.”</p>
<p>depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to confess one thing, which fora time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter, that I hadknown it, and purposely kept it from him. He was angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of yoursister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me now.”</p>
<p>most delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable;</p>
<p>laughed at, and it was rather too early to begin.In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 59</head>
<p>“My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?”</p>
<p>was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from allthe others when they sat down to table.</p>
<p>they had wandered</p>
<p>till she was beyond her own knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anythingelse, awakened a suspicion of the truth.</p>
<p>The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The acknowledged lovers talkedand laughed, the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated andconfused, rather knew that she was happy than felt herself to be so; for, besides the immediateembarrassment, there were other evils before her.She anticipated whatwould be felt in thefamily when her situation became known;she was aware that</p>
<p>with the others it was adislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.</p>
<p>At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet's generalhabits, she was absolutely incredulous here.</p>
<p>shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.”</p>
<p>“This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am surenobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are engaged.”</p>
<p>“Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.”</p>
<p>“You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be forgot.Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall</p>
<p>Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,”</p>
<p>“My dear, dear Lizzy, I would &#8212; I do congratulate you &#8212; but are youcertain? forgive the question &#8212; are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?”</p>
<p>“There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that we are to bethe happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?”</p>
<p>“Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But weconsidered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything rather than marry withoutaffection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?”</p>
<p>“Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I ought to do,when I tell you all.”</p>
<p>“Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will</p>
<p>“My dearest sister, now be be serious. I want to talk veryseriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?”</p>
<p>“It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began. But I believe</p>
<p>she would be serious,however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances ofattachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing further to wish.</p>
<p>“Now I am quite happy,”</p>
<p>“for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it fornothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley andyourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley andLambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you.”</p>
<p>She had been unwilling tomention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer</p>
<p>All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.</p>
<p>cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning,“if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dearBingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, andnot disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley's way.”</p>
<p>was really vexed that</p>
<p>always giving him such an epithet.</p>
<p>As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth,as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud,</p>
<p>“Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way</p>
<p>“to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr.Darcy has never seen the view.”</p>
<p>“It may do very well for the others,”</p>
<p>“but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?”</p>
<p>Kitty owned that</p>
<p>view from the Mount,and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her,</p>
<p>disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking tohim, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.”</p>
<p>During their walk,it was resolved that</p>
<p>how her mother would take</p>
<p>whether all his wealth andgrandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted withit, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense;</p>
<p>In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also andfollow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition,but he was going to be made</p>
<p>choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her &#8212;was a wretched reflection,and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a littlerelieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in awhisper,</p>
<p>“Go to your father, he wants you in the library.”</p>
<p>She was gone directly.</p>
<p>Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.</p>
<p>“what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man? Have notyou always hated him?”</p>
<p>How earnestly did she then wish that</p>
<p>It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward togive; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.</p>
<p>“Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and youmay have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?”</p>
<p>“None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would</p>
<p>she replied, with tears in her eyes,</p>
<p>know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.”</p>
<p>“I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should neverdare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to you, if you are resolved on having him. But let meadvise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you trulyesteemed your husband; unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal</p>
<p>your partner in life. You know not what you are about.”</p>
<p>still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length,</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy was really the</p>
<p>the gradual change which</p>
<p>his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months' suspense,and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father's incredulity,</p>
<p>said he, when she ceased speaking,</p>
<p>with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy.”</p>
<p>what Mr. Darcy had</p>
<p>He heard her with astonishment.</p>
<p>“This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing; made up thematch, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy.Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and would have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their ownway. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.”</p>
<p>He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading Mr. Collins's letter; andafter laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go &#8212; saying, as she quitted the room,</p>
<p>Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour's quietreflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure.Every thing was too recent</p>
<p>but the evening passed tranquilly away;there was no longeranything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.</p>
<p>When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her, and made the importantcommunication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was itunder many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of herfamily, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again,wonder, and bless herself.</p>
<p>“Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who wouldhave thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages youwill have! Jane's is nothing to it &#8212; nothing at all. I am so pleased &#8212; so happy. Such a charming man! &#8212; so handsome! so tall!&#8212; Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house intown! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted.”</p>
<p>This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and</p>
<p>such an effusion was heard</p>
<p>soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed</p>
<p>'Tis as good as a Lord! And a special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr.Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow.”</p>
<p>This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and</p>
<p>possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations' consent, there was still something to be wished for.But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in suchawe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference</p>
<p>Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him;</p>
<p>he was rising every hour in</p>
<p>“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,”</p>
<p>>your husband quite as well as Jane's.”</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 60</head>
<p>spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having everfallen in love with her.</p>
<p>“How could you begin?”</p>
<p>“I can comprehend your going on charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; butwhat could set you off in the first place?”</p>
<p>“I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid thefoundation. It is too long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun.”</p>
<p>“My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners &#8212; my behaviour to <hirend="i(1)">you was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?”</p>
<p>“You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is,that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always speaking, and looking, andthinking for your approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because I was so unlike them . Hadyou not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were alwaysnoble and just; and in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you. There &#8212; I have saved you the troubleof accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me&#8212; but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love.”</p>
<p>“Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was ill at</p>
<p>“Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it by all</p>
<p>occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come tothe point at last. What made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you called, did you look as</p>
<p>“Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.”</p>
<p>“But I was embarrassed.”</p>
<p>“And so was I.”</p>
<p>“You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.”</p>
<p>“A man who had felt less, might.”</p>
<p>“How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should beso reasonable as to admit it! But I wonder how long you would have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I wonder whenyou would have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to Lydia had certainly greateffect. Too much, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach of promise? for I oughtnot to have mentioned the subject. This will never do.”</p>
<p>“You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady Catherine'sunjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desireof expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to wait for any opening of yours. My aunt's intelligence had given me hope, and I wasdetermined at once to know every thing.”</p>
<p>“Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for sheloves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be embarrassed? or had you</p>
<p>“My real purpose was to see you, and to judge, if I could,whether I might ever hope to make you love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still partial toBingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made.”</p>
<p>“Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to befall her?”</p>
<p>“I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to be done,and if you will give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done directly.”</p>
<p>“And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and admire theevenness of your writing, as another young lady once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.”</p>
<p>From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy had been over-rated,Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's long letter; but now, having that to communicate which she knew would bemost welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as follows:</p>
<p>“I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done, foryour long, kind, satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.But now suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flightwhich the subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praisehim a great deal more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I be so silly as to wishit! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other peoplehave said so before, but not one with such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love inthe world that he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours, etc.”</p>
<p>Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still different from either,was what Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply to his last.</p>
<p>“I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon be thewife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has more to give.</p>
<p>Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching marriage, were all that wasaffectionate and insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former professions of regard. Janewas not deceived, but she was affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was</p>
<p>The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information, was as sincere as herbrother's in sending it. Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of being loved by her</p>
<p>Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations to Elizabeth from hiswife,</p>
<p>the Collinses were come</p>
<p>The reason of this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered soexceedingly angry by the contents of her nephew's letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till the stormwas blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she mustsometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband. He bore it,however, with admirable calmness. He could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of thecountry, and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. If he did shrug his shoulders, it wasnot till Sir William was out of sight.</p>
<p>Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his forbearance; and thoughMrs. Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good humour encouraged, yet,whenever she did speak, she must be vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to makeher more elegant. Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to herself, andto those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from</p>
<p>she looked forward with delight to the time when</p>
</div><div><head>Chapter 61</head>
<p>Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters. With whatdelighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family,</p>
<p>sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domesticfelicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly.</p>
<p>Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener fromhome than anything else could do. He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least expected.</p>
<p>Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to hermother and Meryton relations was not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart. Thedarling wish of his sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition toevery other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.</p>
<p>Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters.In society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed</p>
<p>further disadvantage of Lydia's society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay withher, with the promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.</p>
<p>Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuitof accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still moralizeover every morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own,it was suspected by her father that</p>
<p>without much reluctance.</p>
<p>sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood hadbefore been unknown to her; and in spite of every thing, was not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune. Thecongratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by his wife at least, if not by himself, such ahope was cherished. The letter was to this effect:</p>
<p>“My dear Lizzy, “I wish you joy. If you love Mr.Darcy half as well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so rich, and when you have nothing elseto do, I hope you will think of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not think we shall have quite moneyenough to live upon without some help. Any place would do, of about three or four hundred a year; but however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about</p>
<p>she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind. Suchrelief, however, as it was in her power to afford,by the practice of whatmight be called economy in her own private expences,</p>
<p>It had always been evident to her that</p>
<p>under the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their support;and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or herself were sure of being applied tofor some little assistance towards discharging their bills.Their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, wasunsettled in the extreme. They were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought. His</p>
<p>to reputation which her marriage had given her.</p>
<p>sake, he assisted him further in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London orBath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently staid so long, that even Bingley's good humour was overcome, and</p>
<p>Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as she thought it advisable toretain the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive to Darcy as</p>
<p>Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy hadhoped to see. They were able to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; thoughat first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of talking to her brother. He, who had alwaysinspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge whichhad never before fallen in her way. By Elizabeth's instructions, she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband which abrother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.</p>
<p>Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to allthe genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive,especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he was prevailed on tooverlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, eitherto her affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite ofthat pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the</p>
<p>With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth,really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into Derbyshire, had been</p>
</div></body></TEI>
